AVIAGEN Brief1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Deep Pectoral Myopathy (DPM), or Green Muscle Disease, is a degenerative disease of the minor pectoral muscles (i.e., the 
tenders) characterized by atrophy and necrosis. The condition arises when the muscle fibers become deficient in oxygen and is 
associated with sudden and excessive wing flapping. The development of the disease can be split into three categories. Category 
1 is the acute inflammatory lesion in which the deep pectoral muscle is very red and hemorrhagic. Category 2 describes the stage 
at which the lesion in the inner fillet becomes well-defined and is sometimes circumscribed by a hemorrhagic ring. Category 3 
exhibits the progressive degeneration and greening of damaged tissue. Although the risk of DPM is increased in heavy broilers, 
it can occur at any age or weight and depends upon the management and husbandry systems employed. Identifying and 
eliminating the management issues that contribute to wing flapping and the de velopment of the condition is vital to reducing 
the incidence of DPM.
INTRODUCTION
DPM can be a hidden issue in modern-day broiler chickens.  
The condition is characterized by necrosis and atrophy of 
the tenders (i.e., supracoracoideus or minor pectoral muscles 
[inner fillet]). The lesions often affect both tenders and vary 
in color, progressing from a pinkish hemorrhagic appearance 
to a gray-greenish discoloration, as illustrated in Figure 1.
DPM was first described in mature breeder turkeys and 
broiler breeders but is now more common in meat-type 
chickens, especially those selected for breast muscle 
development. The affected muscles are discarded during 
deboning, resulting in saleable meat yield losses. However, 
the major issue with DPM is that if the birds are marketed 
as whole carcasses or parts, the problem is rarely detected 
during processing, resulting in consumer complaints and 
making the cause of the issue difficult to identify.
The condition is not associated with any infectious agent 
and, therefore, has no public health significance other than 
affecting the aesthetic appearance of the meat.DEEP PECTORAL MYOPATHY
Reducing the Incidence in Broiler Flocks
FIGURE 1: Deep Pectoral Myopathy.
.
AVIAGEN Brief: Deep Pectoral Myopathy 2
WHY DOES DPM AFFECT BREAST 
MUSCLES?
The pectoral muscles in avian species are associated with 
flight, and the deep and superficial pectorals work in 
synergy, one to raise the wing and the other to lower it. 
The anatomy of these muscles is, however, intrinsically 
different in that the inner fillet has a tough outer sheath 
made up of dense fibrous tissue, which is inelastic. The 
outer (or major) muscle is surrounded by loose connective 
tissue that moves easily over the muscle surface as the 
muscle profile changes.
Contraction of the major pectoral muscles (the breast 
fillet) and the minor pectoral muscles (the tender) are 
responsible for the up and down strokes of the wings. 
During contraction, these muscles expand with increased 
blood supply (i.e., muscle pumping). The expansion of the 
minor pectoral muscle (by as much as a 25% increase in 
volume) is problematic because this muscle is confined 
in a tight compartment sandwiched between bone (the 
sternum) and the large breast fillet. The minor pectoral 
muscle is also encased in a rigid, fibrous sheath that 
restricts muscle volume increases. Therefore, when 
intramuscular pressure rises to levels above circulating 
blood pressure, the blood supply flowing into the muscle 
stops. With continued muscle activity, oxygen deficiency 
rapidly develops, and a lack of oxygen (ischemic necrosis) 
in the muscle fibers occurs. There is also an additive effect 
as the muscle pH decreases. Typically, the middle third of 
the muscle is involved. In experimental studies, relatively 
short periods of wing flapping are enough to induce these 
degenerative changes.RECOGNITION AND IDENTIFICATION OF 
THE DEVELOPMENT STAGES IN DPM
An investigation should be organized in response to DPM 
complaints from the processing plant and/or customers. 
This should include identifying the category of DPM (fresh 
or old) at the processing plant. This information can then 
be correlated to flock management practices.
CATEGORY 1: 
The acute inflammatory lesion in which the deep pectoral 
muscle is very red and hemorrhagic. Hemorrhages also 
appear on the fibrous sheath (Figure 2). There is an 
obvious suffusion of serous fluid in the area of the damage, 
making it appear wet. This stage will likely be associated 
with a handling event (e.g., catching) and will be present for 
about 48 hours.
FIGURE 2: Early Acute Pectoral Myopathy.
KEY  
POINT
• DPM is rarely detectable during processing if the birds are marketed as whole carcasses or parts.

AVIAGEN Brief: Deep Pectoral Myopathy 3
CATEGORY 2:
At this stage, the lesion in the inner fillet has become well-
defined and is sometimes circumscribed by a hemorrhagic 
ring (Figure 3). The affected areas are pale pink to plum 
colored, and there are clear changes consistent with early 
coagulative necrosis of the muscle when the tissue texture 
becomes fibrous. This is sometimes described as “fish flesh.” 
This stage will continue for a few days after the initial event 
or incident.
FIGURE 3: Pectoral Myopathy — Developing Lesions.
CATEGORY 3: 
This stage reveals the progressive degeneration and greening 
of the damaged tissue (Figure 4). Often, only the middle part 
of the fillet is involved, and the progressive greening parallels 
the loss of cellular structure so that a putty-like consistency 
develops within the lesion. This green necrotic area will 
persist and, through time, will gradually reduce in size as it is 
reabsorbed so that the symmetry of the breast is lost in some 
older birds. The green color is produced by the breakdown of 
hemoglobin and myoglobin into bile salts.
FIGURE 4: Aged Pectoral Myopathy.FACTORS AFFECTING THE OCCURRENCE 
OF DPM
The pectoral muscles comprise approximately one-quarter 
of the total live weight in modern meat chickens. Raising 
broiler chickens to heavy market weights can increase 
the probability of DPM occurrence. Incidence depends 
on management and husbandry systems, not simply body 
weight, as birds of any age or weight can be affected.
DPM is associated with the following factors:
• Excessive wing flapping.
• Heavy market body weight.
• Sex (incidence can be higher in males compared to 
females).
• High white meat yield.
• Rapid growth rate.
Commercially-raised broiler chickens are kept relatively 
comfortable and inactive during the growing period. 
Consequently, the pectoral muscles are not exercised 
enough to increase the efficiency of the circulatory 
supply to the muscles and to allow the expansion of the 
surrounding fibrous sheath. It is doubtful that even a subtle 
amount of wing activity would help improve circulation or 
develop the sheath adequately.
Few (if any) processing plants regularly track or document 
the incidence of DPM. Detecting DPM on whole carcasses 
and parts is extremely difficult, as lesions are not visible 
during carcass inspection or sorting. Since birds also exhibit 
no symptoms, finding affected live birds in a flock and 
treating them is not possible.
KEY  
POINT
• The desirable efficiency in growth and 
anatomy of today’s broiler brings with  
it the possibility of DPM development.
AVIAGEN Brief: Deep Pectoral Myopathy 4
TABLE 1: Flock Management Guidelines to Minimize Unnecessary Wing Activity.Preventative management is the key to avoiding DPM. 
Controlling the incidence of DPM hinges upon identifying 
and eliminating specific flock management issues that 
contribute to the development of the condition.
To avoid the occurrence of DPM, the following flock 
management guidelines (Table 1) are suggested as starting 
points for investigating and minimizing any unnecessary 
wing activity.
KEY  
POINT
• The key to reducing the incidence of 
DPM lies in management of the broiler 
flock and minimizing wing flapping.
DO NOT FRIGHTEN BIRDSLIMIT SUDDEN AND  
EXCESSIVE WING EXERCISECONTROL OVERALL  
FLOCK FLIGHTINESS
Do not allow other animals in or 
around the house.Avoid excessive human activity in 
the house, especially if the birds 
are flighty.Bird activity and flightiness 
increase with increasing natural 
day length.
Eliminate novel sounds (e.g., 
buzzing security lights, sudden 
use of noisy ventilation fans, 
tractor/generator operation in or 
near houses).Avoid walking birds too fast, 
especially when migration barriers 
(e.g., nets, pipes, or fences) are 
used; this may cause the birds to 
pile up.Birds respond to increased light 
intensity with increased activity. 
Blue curtains may help calm the 
flocks in curtain-sided facilities.
Limit bird handling, weighing, 
penning, etc. Weigh birds in a 
bucket (or similar) instead of by 
the legs.Train personnel for gentle  
bird handling techniques  
during catching. In environmentally-controlled 
houses, avoid sudden and 
excessive increases in light 
intensity with dimmers, especially 
under low light intensity  
[<3 lux (0.28 fc)] conditions.
Avoid excitement induced by 
frequent thinning of flocks.Keep birds comfortable during 
transport to the processing plant. 
Low crate stocking densities can 
cause problems. Prevent any 
unnecessary bird movements 
when crated. Automatic catching 
systems can exacerbate wing 
flapping depending on the system 
used.Avoid extended feed and water 
withdrawal periods (>4 hours).
Intermittent lighting programs 
can be a potential problem due to 
frequent bird stimulation.In tunnel-ventilated houses, use 
migration fences approximately 
100 ft (30 m) apart.
Minimize birds perching on 
swinging equipment such as  
feed tracks, which allows  
the birds to flap.Ensure that stocking density and 
feeder and drinker space are 
adequate.
A dawn-to-dusk type dimmer 
offers a gradual increase in lux.
AVIAGEN Brief: Deep Pectoral Myopathy 5
 www.aviagen.comPrivacy Notice: Aviagen® collects data to effectively communicate and provide information to you about our 
products and our business. This data may include your email address, name, business address and telephone 
number. To view the full Aviagen privacy notice visit Aviagen.com.
Aviagen and the Aviagen logo are registered trademarks of Aviagen in the US and other countries.  
All other trademarks or brands are registered by their respective owners.
© 2025 Aviagen.
0325-V2CONCLUSION
DPM continues to be a hidden issue for broilers that leads to losses in saleable meat yield when identified at processing. 
Although it is more likely to be seen in heavier birds, it is essential to remember that birds of any age or weight are also 
susceptible. Reducing DPM is a broiler flock management responsibility, and focus should be given to identifying and 
eliminating flock management issues that can increase the incidence of DPM. Preventative management is critical.
