Citation: Shaji, S.; Selvaraj, R.K.;
Shanmugasundaram, R. Salmonella
Infection in Poultry: A Review on the
Pathogen and Control Strategies.
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms11112814
Academic Editors: M ónica Oleastro
and Ana Botelho
Received: 20 October 2023
Revised: 8 November 2023
Accepted: 11 November 2023
Published: 20 November 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
microorganisms
Review
Salmonella Infection in Poultry: A Review on the Pathogen and
Control Strategies
Syamily Shaji1
, Ramesh K. Selvaraj1and Revathi Shanmugasundaram2,*
1Department of Poultry Science, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA;
syamily.shaji@uga.edu (S.S.); selvaraj@uga.edu (R.K.S.)
2Toxicology and Mycotoxin Research Unit, US National Poultry Research Center, Athens, GA 30605, USA
*Correspondence: revathi.shan@usda.gov
Abstract: Salmonella is the leading cause of food-borne zoonotic disease worldwide. Non-typhoidal
Salmonella serotypes are the primary etiological agents associated with salmonellosis in poultry.
Contaminated poultry eggs and meat products are the major sources of human Salmonella infection.
Horizontal and vertical transmission are the primary routes of infection in chickens. The principal
virulence genes linked to Salmonella pathogenesis in poultry are located in Salmonella pathogenicity
islands 1 and 2 (SPI-1 and SPI-2). Cell-mediated and humoral immune responses are involved in the
defense against Salmonella invasion in poultry. Vaccination of chickens and supplementation of feed
additives like prebiotics, probiotics, postbiotics, synbiotics, and bacteriophages are currently being
used to mitigate the Salmonella load in poultry. Despite the existence of various control measures,
there is still a need for a broad, safe, and well-deﬁned strategy that can confer long-term protection
from Salmonella in poultry ﬂocks. This review examines the current knowledge on the etiology,
transmission, cell wall structure, nomenclature, pathogenesis, immune response, and efﬁcacy of
preventative approaches to Salmonella .
Keywords: Salmonella ; vaccines; poultry
1. Introduction
Salmonella is the leading cause of foodborne diseases worldwide that infects the gas-
trointestinal tract and causes diarrhea, nausea, and cramps in humans [ 1]. The Center for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that approximately 1.35 million infec-
tions and 420 deaths are reported annually in the United States. Salmonella enterica ser.
Enteritidis ( S.Enteritidis), and Salmonella enterica ser. Typhimurium ( S.Typhimurium),
belonging to the non-typhoidal Salmonella group (NTS), is responsible for the majority of
human salmonellosis. Globally, non-typhoidal Salmonella is responsible for approximately
93 million cases of gastroenteritis and 155,000 fatalities annually. The severity of human
salmonellosis varies depending on factors such as the speciﬁc strain causing the infection,
health conditions, and host age. It has been reported that the infective dose in a human
infant is reported to be 100 bacterial cells, and even fewer cells are required to cause an
infection in an immunocompromised individual [2–4].
Poultry serves as the main reservoir for various non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS)
serotypes among food-producing animals. Epidemiologically signiﬁcant NTS serotypes
include S.Typhimurium, S.Enteritidis, S.Heidelberg, and S.Newport. In North America
and Europe, S.Enteritidis dominates the egg-borne transmission of infection to humans,
whereas S.Typhimurium was the primary serovar associated with external egg contamina-
tion in Australia [ 5–7]. Between 1998 and 2008, poultry accounted for 17.9% of foodborne
illnesses in the United States, with Salmonella ser. Enteritidis and Typhimurium are re-
sponsible for 17.4% and 34% of poultry-related foodborne illnesses, respectively [ 8]. In
2016, a national outbreak of multidrug-resistant S.Heidelberg linked to chicken products
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11112814 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 2 of 27
produced by a single poultry company was reported in California and Washington, leading
to high hospitalization rates and indicating high virulence strains of Salmonella [9].
Society pays signiﬁcant health costs and economic burdens caused by nontyphoidal
Salmonella associated with chickens, estimated at 2.79 billion annually. This concern is
growing as the global demand for ready-to-eat food products continues to rise [ 10]. Given
the emergence of multi-drug-resistant bacteria and the associated public health crisis,
alternatives to antibiotics are gaining more importance in the poultry sector, as antibiotic
residues are known to contaminate consumed meat [ 11]. Several preharvest and postharvest
intervention strategies have been developed to ensure the safety and hygiene of poultry
products. Preharvest interventions include farm-level management, including the use of
feed additives and biosecurity measures. Post-harvest methods include activities during
carcass slaughter and meat processing, including the implementation of Hazard Analysis
Critical Control Point (HACCP) plans [4].
Furthermore, with the FDA’s decision to abate the use of antibiotics in animal agricul-
ture and consumer demand for antibiotic-free chicken, alternative control strategies that
include vaccination programs are routinely followed by producers to combat pathogenic
bacteria. Ensuring the sustainable production of poultry products is critical to meeting
the future global demand for poultry products. However, annual Salmonella outbreaks
can signiﬁcantly impact production efﬁciency and food safety. To eradicate pathogens like
Salmonella , which has multiple infectious serotypes, more powerful vaccines that confer
cross-protection against multiple serotypes, including emerging serotypes, and induce
long-term immunity are needed.
This review article focuses on the current understanding of Salmonella as a pathogen,
its pathogenesis, and control strategies against Salmonella in poultry.
2. Etiology and Transmission
Salmonella spp. is a Gram-negative, oxidase-negative, non-spore-forming bacillus
member of the Enterobacteriaceae family. Salmonella is a facultative anaerobic intracellular
bacillus with a cell length between 2–5 m. They are non-fastidious, motile, and have
peritrichous ﬂagella, except Salmonella enterica serovar Gallinarum and Pullorum. Most
Salmonella serovars, except S.Typhimurium, are aerogenic. Salmonella is capable of produc-
ing hydrogen sulﬁde and converting nitrates to nitrites. Most Salmonella typically grows at
temperatures ranging from 5–45C, with the ideal temperature being between 35–37C
and at the optimum pH range of 6.5 and 7.5. Some strains can even grow at a pH as low
as 3.7. Salmonella is sensitive to salt concentrations ranging from 0.5% to 5% and survives
in environments with higher water activity (a w) ranging from 0.96 to 0.99. They can also
survive in low-moisture food products for a long duration [12]. The severity of Salmonella
infection varies according to many factors, including host age, host immunity, the presence
of coinfections, environmental stress, managerial characteristics, and infective dose. Older
birds, for instance, tend to be less susceptible to Salmonellosis even with concentrations of
106CFU/mL of S.Typhimurium [13].
Salmonella is distributed worldwide and is endemic to areas where animal husbandry
is practiced. Serovars also vary in their distribution across the world, with ST and SE being
prevalent everywhere. Some serovars are host-speciﬁc, like Salmonella ser. Abortusovis in
sheep, Salmonella ser. Choleraesuis in pigs, and Salmonella ser. Dublin in cattle. Typhoidal
Salmonella serovars like S.Typhi and S.Paratyphi are human pathogens transmitted via
the fecal-oral route. In contrast, NTS is zoonotic and can infect a wide range of animal
reservoirs, including birds, reptiles, dogs, cats, and rodents [14].
The primary reservoir for Salmonella in animals, particularly poultry, is the primary
source of food-borne human salmonellosis. Transmission occurs mainly through the
consumption of contaminated egg and meat products [ 12]. During the production cycle,
poultry can become infected with Salmonella through various routes, including contact with
carrier animals like rodents, cats, and insects. Contaminated poultry feed, litter, water, and
aerosol transmission also contribute to the transmission of Salmonella [15].
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 3 of 27
Salmonella contamination of eggs can occur via two routes, namely horizontal and
vertical, particularly by the serovar S.Enteritidis. In vertical or transovarial transmission,
the infection occurs directly in the yolk, vitelline membrane, and albumen before the egg
is laid. The infection originates in reproductive organs such as the ovary and oviduct
with S.Enteritidis. As a result, bacteria enter the egg even before the eggshell is formed
in the oviduct [ 16]. In horizontal or fecal-oral transmission, eggs become contaminated
by eggshell penetration from the colonized gastrointestinal tract (GIT). Additionally, con-
taminated feces transfer the pathogen to eggs during or after oviposition. Feces serve as
nutrient reservoirs for Salmonella ’s growth, contaminating the environment and potentially
infecting the rest of the ﬂock in the same enclosure. The bacterial penetration of the egg is
more rapid during the ﬁrst few minutes post-oviposition, as some cuticles are immature
and few pores are open [ 17]. Outer shell contamination by Salmonella is evident in eggs
collected from contaminated nests and hatchery environments. Some studies reported that
there is no direct relationship between eggshell thickness and Salmonella Typhimurium
penetration, but eggs with high speciﬁc gravity shells tend to offer more resistance against
S.Enteritidis penetration [16].
Insects can act as vectors for Salmonella on poultry farms. Cockroaches, for example,
have the potential to introduce foodborne pathogens like Salmonella into poultry production
facilities due to their ability to cross-contaminate and transmit the pathogen to uninfected
individuals within their group. Studies have indicated that cockroaches infected with
S.Typhimurium can transfer the bacteria to the surface of the table egg [ 18]. Flies captured
in poultry establishments have been shown to harbor Salmonella . The poultry mite ( Der-
manyssus gallinae ) has been implicated as a biological vector of Salmonella Enteritidis and
has been reported to carry the bacteria within poultry premises. It is suggested that the
primary source of infection could be oral ingestion of crushed contaminated mites by the
chicks, as well as the mite’s blood meal [ 19].Alphitobius diaperinus , also known as the litter
beetle, has been found to transmit Salmonella to poultry in an experimental infection [ 20].
According to Bastiaan and Aize, rodents such as mice can act as carriers of Salmonella in
layer ﬂocks [ 21]. Feral mice present in poultry farms may serve as a rich source of multiple
phenotypes and genotypes of S.Enteritidis [ 21]. In African countries, S.Kentucky and
S.Enteritidis were the major serovars isolated from lizards and rodents inhabiting the
poultry houses. It is hypothesized that the feces of lizards and rodents could contaminate
the feed and litter, posing a biosecurity threat [22].
Salmonella can colonize the intestines of wild birds, turning them into asymptomatic
reservoirs. Hughes et al. reported the isolation of different Salmonella serovars from wild
birds, mainly passerine birds, in northern England [ 23].S.Typhimurium strain DT160
caused signiﬁcant mortality in wild birds and gastrointestinal illness in humans in New
Zealand in 2000, indicating a zoonotic risk [ 24]. Wild birds like one buff-necked ibis, red-
legged seriema, and eared dove captured near poultry facilities had Salmonella infection.
Moreover, S.Typhimurium dominated the serotype isolated from wild pigeons [ 25]. It
is hypothesized these birds play a vital role in the transmission of Salmonella serotypes
to poultry and humans during migration, seasonal movements, and feeding [ 26]. Olga
et al. found that 32.3% of the bacterial pathogens identiﬁed in the wild bird population in a
national park in Ukraine tested positive for S.Enteritidis. These birds migrate to various
parts of the world, contributing to the distribution of the pathogen to locations far from
its source [ 27]. Furthermore, a shift in the poultry Salmonella serotypes linked with the
spread of clones has been identiﬁed as a contributing factor to the increase in human cases
ofS.Infantis between 2011 and 2013 across Europe [ 28]. Likewise, S.Heidelberg, with its
multiple clones in the US, is one of the top poultry and human serotypes associated with
multistate outbreaks [ 9]. Figure 1 summarizes the overview of the transmission routes and
vectors of Salmonella in poultry.
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 4 of 27
Microorganisms 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 27  
  
Figure 1. Overview of the various transmission routes of Salmonella . Created with Biorender.com 
(accessed on 26 July 2023).  
3. Cell Wall and Nomenclature  
The cell wall of Salmonella  consists of lipids, lipopolysaccharides (LPS), proteins, and 
lipoproteins  [29]. The complex polysaccharide moiety with the Lipid A portion serves as 
an endotoxin and is responsible for bacterial virulence  [29]. The LPS complex comprises  
three regions: (1) an outer O polysaccharide -specific side chain , (2) a middle core portion , 
and (3) an inner lipid A. The somatic O antigen is the central component of the endotoxin, 
composed of various monosaccharides and polysaccharides  [29]. The Somatic O antigen 
is the polysaccharide portion on the bacterial surface that contains multiple [5–8] mono-
saccharides. The O -specific side chains determine the immunological specificities of the 
respective O -antigens  [30]. Furthermore, all Salmonella  O antigens share five common sug-
ars: heptose, ketodeoxyoctonic acid, D -glucose, D -galactose, and D -glucosamine. It has 
been hypothesized that all -specific Salmonella  polysaccharides have a common core com-
posed of these sugars, with attached chains made of sugars unique to the specific  serotype  
[31]. In summary, variations in the LPS structure exist in the O -polysaccharide chain, and 
these variations are responsible for the antigenic factors that confer serotype specificity.  
Genotypic analysis indicated that  Salmonella  has about 60 soma tic antigens using 
gene transfer [32]. Based on these antigens and specific antisera, Salmonella  can be grouped 
into different serotypes. In brief, Salmonella  has three cell surface antigens: an O antigen 
(cell-wall somatic), an H antigen (flagellar), and a K antigen (capsular). The flagellar anti-
gen is a thermolabile protein, while the somatic O antigen is thermostable  [4]. Some 
serovars of Salmonella  also have a K antigen, which is a heat -sensitive carbohydrate. 
Among the Enterobacteriaceae , Salmonella  is unique for having two distinct H antigens: 
phase 1 (specific) and phase 2 (non -specific) flagella antigens  [31]. 
Salmonella  was initially isolated i n 1885 by Theobald Smith and Daniel Elmer Salmon 
from pigs infected with classical swine fever [33]. Currently, the nomenclature system rec-
ommended by the World Health Organization (WHO), namely supplement 2001 (no. 45) 
to the Kauffmann -White scheme, is fo llowed for research on Salmonella . According to this 
Figure 1. Overview of the various transmission routes of Salmonella . Created with Biorender.com
(accessed on 26 July 2023).
3. Cell Wall and Nomenclature
The cell wall of Salmonella consists of lipids, lipopolysaccharides (LPS), proteins,
and lipoproteins [ 29]. The complex polysaccharide moiety with the Lipid A portion
serves as an endotoxin and is responsible for bacterial virulence [ 29]. The LPS complex
comprises three regions: (1) an outer O polysaccharide-speciﬁc side chain, (2) a middle
core portion, and (3) an inner lipid A. The somatic O antigen is the central component
of the endotoxin, composed of various monosaccharides and polysaccharides [ 29]. The
Somatic O antigen is the polysaccharide portion on the bacterial surface that contains
multiple [ 5–8] monosaccharides. The O-speciﬁc side chains determine the immunological
speciﬁcities of the respective O-antigens [ 30]. Furthermore, all Salmonella O antigens
share ﬁve common sugars: heptose, ketodeoxyoctonic acid, D-glucose, D-galactose, and
D-glucosamine. It has been hypothesized that all-speciﬁc Salmonella polysaccharides have
a common core composed of these sugars, with attached chains made of sugars unique
to the speciﬁc serotype [ 31]. In summary, variations in the LPS structure exist in the O-
polysaccharide chain, and these variations are responsible for the antigenic factors that
confer serotype speciﬁcity.
Genotypic analysis indicated that Salmonella has about 60 somatic antigens using gene
transfer [ 32]. Based on these antigens and speciﬁc antisera, Salmonella can be grouped
into different serotypes. In brief, Salmonella has three cell surface antigens: an O antigen
(cell-wall somatic), an H antigen (ﬂagellar), and a K antigen (capsular). The ﬂagellar antigen
is a thermolabile protein, while the somatic O antigen is thermostable [ 4]. Some serovars
ofSalmonella also have a K antigen, which is a heat-sensitive carbohydrate. Among the
Enterobacteriaceae ,Salmonella is unique for having two distinct H antigens: phase 1 (speciﬁc)
and phase 2 (non-speciﬁc) ﬂagella antigens [31].
Salmonella was initially isolated in 1885 by Theobald Smith and Daniel Elmer Salmon
from pigs infected with classical swine fever [ 33]. Currently, the nomenclature system
recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO), namely supplement 2001 (no. 45)
to the Kauffmann-White scheme, is followed for research on Salmonella . According to this
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 5 of 27
terminology, the genus Salmonella includes two species, Salmonella enterica and Salmonella
bongori , that belong to it based on the differences in 16-sRNA sequence analysis. Historically,
the two species are further subdivided into six subspecies based on biochemical and
phylogenetic properties and denoted by Roman numerals: enterica (I),salamae (II),arizonae
(IIIa), diarizonae (IIIb), houtenae (IV), and indica (VI) [ 32,34–36]. Among the subspecies of
Salmonella ,S.enterica subsp. enterica is the one most commonly associated with human and
animal infections [32].
However, the serovars within the subspecies are named according to the Kauffman
and White classiﬁcation system, which is based on the immunoreactivity of the major
Salmonella cell surface antigens. Each Salmonella serovar possesses a unique antigenic
combination, and a serovar (or serotype) name is assigned to each individual combination
of the O:H1:H2 antigenic formula [ 37]. The Kauffman-White Scheme was ﬁrst published
in 1934 with 44 serovars. The latest one, released in 2007, has over 2500 serovars [ 38].
According to this classiﬁcation system, the Salmonella serovars are formed by different
combinations of 46 O antigens and 114 H antigens.
S.enterica serovars are the etiological agents of typhoidal and non-typhoidal Salmonella
infection, with the former being host-restricted to humans and the latter zoonotic with a
broad homeothermic host range [ 34].S. enterica comprises over 2400 serotypes. Among
the 100 serovars of epidemiological importance in the S.enterica species, S.Enteritidis and
S.Typhimurium are the most prevalent serovars [39].
Salmonella serotypes are characterized and identiﬁed using various methods, including
phage typing, PCR ribotyping, pulsed-ﬁeld gel electrophoresis analysis, multi-locus DNA
sequencing, and antimicrobial resistance patterns [ 40–45]. Recently, alternative molecular
methods like the Check and Trace Salmonella assay (a microarray method using molecular
markers) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS)-based serotype prediction tools have been
used to characterize Salmonella isolates [ 46,47]. Compared to traditional serotyping, these
methods are claimed to be easy, requiring only a short turn-around time. Traditional
serotyping based on phenotypes can be challenging due to the complexity of typing sera,
antigen preparation, and antisera required for testing [23,48].
4. Pathogenesis
Salmonella pathogenesis can be divided into several stages, including adhesion and
invasion of gut epithelial cells, survival, multiplication within the host cells, and extraintesti-
nal spread. Salmonella , being an enteric pathogen, reaches the intestine via oral ingestion
(horizontal transmission) from contaminated environments, feed, and water. Even a very
low infective dose of Salmonella Enteritidis, as low as 1–5 bacteria cells, can lead to infection
in day-old chicks. The incubation period for Salmonella is usually 7 to 14 days [ 4]. The
bacterium’s ability to withstand a pH of 3.7 in the stomach helps the bacteria pass through
the acidic stomach environment [4].
Upon reaching the small intestine, Salmonella invades and adheres to the intestinal
epithelial cells using ﬁmbrial adhesins. Salmonella ’s entry into the intestinal mucosa is
facilitated mainly through M cells located over the Peyer’s patches (mucosal-associated
lymphoid tissues). Other routes include internalization by dendritic cells and uptake
by enterocytes mediated by effector proteins associated with virulence genes in SPI-1-
TTSS [49,50].
M cells, specialized antigen sampling cells of the intestinal epithelium, play a critical
role in the uptake and active transportation (transcytosis) of Salmonella to the underlying
lymphoid follicles. This uptake of bacterial antigen by M-cells is vital in the develop-
ment of mucosal and systemic immune responses, as Salmonella antigens are delivered to
mononuclear phagocytes like dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages [51].
Macrophages can internalize Salmonella but are unable to kill them as the bacteria
can inhibit the fusion of phagosomes with secondary lysosomes, the mechanism used by
macrophages to destroy intracellular pathogens. This enhances the intracellular survivabil-
ity of the bacteria [ 52].Salmonella proliferates inside the macrophages within a structure
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 6 of 27
called the Salmonella -containing vacuole (SCV) and eventually translocates widely to the
draining mesenteric lymph nodes, leading to bacteremia and invasion of systemic organs
such as the liver, spleen, ovary, and gallbladder [52].
Both young and adult birds are infected by the invasive S.Enteritidis. Young birds
tend to develop a systemic disease with high mortality rates, whereas adult birds can
remain asymptomatic carriers post-colonization by the bacterial pathogen. The infection
dose plays a critical role in developing clinical signs, with clinical salmonellosis being more
likely to develop in young birds infected with high doses of S.Enteritidis [53].
Typhoid fever is caused by the bloodstream dissemination of S.enterica serotype Ty-
phi [ 54]. Non-invasive serotypes of NTS are conﬁned to the gastrointestinal tract, where
they induce signiﬁcant inﬂammation, including focal and diffuse mononuclear cell inﬁltra-
tion, necrosis of epithelial cells, edema, and eventually enterocolitis [ 55]. In brief, Salmonella
has orchestrated mechanisms to co-evolve with their hosts by altering cellular processes
that favor bacterial survival and intracellular proliferation.
Salmonella pathogenic factors are controlled by virulence genes and plasmids, which
are located within Salmonella pathogenicity islands (SPIs). SPIs are a group of genes located
in speciﬁc areas of the bacterial chromosomes that encompass multiple virulence factors,
including invasins, adhesins, and toxins. Salmonella contains a total of twenty-three SPIs,
with SPI-1 and SPI-2 being the two critical ones. Both of these SPIs encode a molecular
apparatus called the type III secretion system (TTSS) or molecular syringe. This TTSS is
responsible for injecting effector proteins produced by Salmonella into the host cell, thereby
establishing the intracellular survival and propagation of Salmonella inside the host [55].
Salmonella has two types of type III secretion systems, T3SS-1 and T3SS-2, found
in SPI-1 and SPI-2, respectively. Brieﬂy, T3SS-1 is responsible for transferring effector
proteins needed for bacterial invasion, SCV ( Salmonella containing vacuoles) biogenesis,
and inﬂammation. On the other hand, T3SS-2 facilitates the transport of effector proteins
that favor SCV maturation, SIF ( Salmonella -induced ﬁlaments) biogenesis, intracellular
survival of the pathogen, and its movement inside Salmonella -containing vacuoles [56].
The effectors of SPI2-T3SS involved in SCV maturation and SIF biogenesis are SifA,
SseJ, SopD2, PipB2, SseF, SseG, SpvB, and SteA. These effectors are essential for convert-
ing early SCV (endosomes) to late SCV , where bacterial replication occurs. Salmonella -
containing vacuoles (SCVs) are specialized structures expressed by TTSS on the SPI-2 used
by the bacteria to reside inside epithelial cells and macrophages to escape from killing by
macrophages through the inhibition of lysosomal fusion [49].
Salmonella -induced ﬁlaments (SIFs) are specialized endosomal tubule projections that
extend from the SCV . They are characterized by lysosomal glycoproteins and endocytic
markers such as Rab4, Rab9, Rab11, and Rab5, among others. These SIFs inside the host cell
cytoplasm form a complex replicative niche. The exact role of SIFs in Salmonella infection is
still unknown [ 57]. It has been reported that the SifA-SKIP-Rab9 complex decreased M6PR
(late endosomal/lysosomal markers) recruitment to the SCV membrane and reduced the
movement of lysosomal enzymes to the SCV . This reduction in the movement of lysosome
enzymes, expanding the SCV population, helps protect intracellular Salmonella from host
defense mechanisms [58].
Further, studies have reported that Salmonella Typhimurium infection causes entero-
cytes to become M-cells, thereby exacerbating inﬂammation and the immune response
associated with enhanced translocation of bacteria across the submucosa. This differen-
tiation of the primed intestinal cells into M cells promotes Salmonella colonization and
host invasion. The mechanism is controlled by the type III effector protein SopB via the
Wnt/ -catenin signaling pathway [59].
A previous study reported by Yakhya et al. found that the deletion of SPI1 led to a
decreased colonization of Salmonella Typhimurium in the cecum and spleen of chickens.
They also reported that the deletion of SPI2-T3SS did not signiﬁcantly affect the cecal
colonization by S.Typhimurium. However, the SPI2 mutation reduced the ability of
S.Typhimurium’s ability to invade the spleen in one-week-old chicks [ 60]. In addition, the
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 7 of 27
Michael et al. study revealed that the disruption of spaS, an essential component of the SPI-1
T3SS, had little inﬂuence on cecal colonization in day-old chicks. In contrast, the mutant
spaS strain was shown to reduce cecal colonization and decrease liver invasion during an
experimental S. Typhimurium infection in one-week-old birds [ 61]. Moreover, the same
study illustrates that the deletion of another gene, ssaU , that encodes major components of
SPI-2 T3SS did not affect bacterial colonization of the intestine but exhibited a signiﬁcant
reduction in S.Typhimurium dissemination to the liver throughout the study [ 61]. A recent
study with the S.Typhimurium challenge model showed that the deletion of SPI-1 and
SPI-2 genes had a negative impact on the mutant strain’s ability to colonize and cause
systemic lesions in the cecum and liver in one-day-old chickens [62].
Salmonella spp. has the ability to form bioﬁlms at room temperature on surfaces in
poultry environments and food processing plants. These bioﬁlm cells are highly resistant to
antimicrobials and contribute to the increased virulence of the bacteria, thereby establishing
a chronic infection. The ability of Salmonella to survive in bioﬁlm poses challenges for
disinfection procedures in poultry environments [ 63]. Figure 2 summarizes Salmonella
pathogenesis.
Microorganisms 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 27  
 Typhimurium’s ability to invade the spleen in one -week-old chicks  [60]. In addition, the 
Michael et al. study revealed that the disruption of spaS, an essential component of the 
SPI-1 T3SS, had little influence on cecal colonization in day -old chicks. In contrast, the 
mutant spaS strain was shown to reduce cecal colonization and decrease liver invasion 
during an experimental  S. Typhimurium  infection in one -week-old birds [61]. Moreover, 
the same study illustrates that the deletion of another gene, ssaU, that encodes major com-
ponents of SPI -2 T3SS did not affect bacterial colonization of the intestine but exhibited a 
significant reduction in S. Typhimurium  dissemination to the liver throughout the study  
[61]. A recent study with the S. Typhimurium challenge model showed that  the deletion 
of SPI-1 and SPI -2 genes had a negative impact on the mutant strain’s ability to colonize 
and cause systemic lesions in the cecum and liver in one -day-old chickens  [62]. 
Salmonella spp. has the ability to form biofilms at room temperature on surfaces in 
poultry environments and food processing plants. These biofilm cells are highly resistant 
to antimicrobials and contribute to the increased virulence of the bacteria, thereby estab-
lishing a c hronic infection. The ability of Salmonella  to survive in biofilm poses challenges 
for disinfection procedures in poultry environments  [63]. Figure 2 summarizes Salmonella  
pathogenesis.  
 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of Salmonella  pathogenesis in pou ltry. Created with Bioren-
der.com (accessed on 26 July 2023).  
5. Immune Response to Salmonella  
The interaction between humoral and cell -mediated immune systems plays a critical 
role in clearing Salmonella infection in poultry. The complex immune response ag ainst Sal-
monella depends on multiple factors, including host species, host age, gut microbiota com-
position, bacterial load, and Salmonella  serotype associated with the infection  [64,65]. 
5.1. Innate Immune System  
The innate and adaptive immune components a re the two main classifications of the 
avian immune system. The innate immune system serves as the first line of defense against 
pathogens, and it has several key components, including (1) chemical and physical barri-
ers such as skin, mucosal epithelia, muc us, and antimicrobial molecules; (2) blood proteins 
such as complement, lectins, and agglutinins; (3) phagocytic effector cells (macrophages, 
neutrophils, monocytes), dendritic cells, heterophils, and natural killer cells; (4) cytokines; 
(5) cellular recep tors (pathogen recognition receptors) such as Toll -like receptors, NOD -
like receptors, and RIG -like receptors; (6) antimicrobial peptides such as defensins and 
cathelicidins  [66]. 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of Salmonella pathogenesis in poultry. Created with Biorender.com
(accessed on 26 July 2023).
5. Immune Response to Salmonella
The interaction between humoral and cell-mediated immune systems plays a critical
role in clearing Salmonella infection in poultry. The complex immune response against
Salmonella depends on multiple factors, including host species, host age, gut microbiota
composition, bacterial load, and Salmonella serotype associated with the infection [64,65].
5.1. Innate Immune System
The innate and adaptive immune components are the two main classiﬁcations of the
avian immune system. The innate immune system serves as the ﬁrst line of defense against
pathogens, and it has several key components, including (1) chemical and physical barriers
such as skin, mucosal epithelia, mucus, and antimicrobial molecules; (2) blood proteins
such as complement, lectins, and agglutinins; (3) phagocytic effector cells (macrophages,
neutrophils, monocytes), dendritic cells, heterophils, and natural killer cells; (4) cytokines;
(5) cellular receptors (pathogen recognition receptors) such as Toll-like receptors, NOD-
like receptors, and RIG-like receptors; (6) antimicrobial peptides such as defensins and
cathelicidins [66].
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 8 of 27
The avian immune organs can be divided into bone marrow, bursa of Fabricius and
thymus, and peripheral lymphoid organs such as the spleen and cecal tonsils [ 67,68].
MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) comprises components of the immune system
linked to the gastrointestinal and bronchial mucosa, providing the ﬁrst line of protection
against pathogens that enter the body through these mucosal surfaces. GALT, a major
component of MALT, contains an isolated or group of lymphoid follicles disseminated in
the lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract, such as the bursa of Fabricius, cecal tonsils
(CT), Meckel’s diverticulum, Peyer’s patches (PP), and intraepithelial lymphocytes. GALT
lymphoid structures are the major secondary lymphoid organs since chickens lack other
peripheral encapsulated lymph nodes [69,70].
Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) are microbial molecular structures
that stimulate the innate and eventually adaptive immune systems. Some examples of
PAMPs include nucleic acids such as single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) and double-stranded
RNA (dsRNA); proteins such as ﬂagellin; cell wall lipids such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and lipoteichoic acids; and carbohydrates like mannans found in fungi [ 66]. Cellular re-
ceptors of the innate immune system that recognize PAMPs in pathogens are known as
pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs). PRRs are present in various immune cells, like
phagocytes, dendritic cells, heterophils, and barrier epithelial cells. Toll-like receptors,
NOD-like receptors, and RIG-like receptors are examples of PRRs. Studies have iden-
tiﬁed 10 Toll-like receptors in chickens [ 71]. The binding of PAMP to the speciﬁc TLRs
results in the production of reactive nitrogen and oxygen intermediates, cytokines, and
co-stimulatory molecules, initiating the adaptive immune response [ 72]. The outer mem-
brane lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of Gram-negative bacteria is the ligand for TLR4, while
TLR5 recognizes bacterial ﬂagellin [66].
Okamura et al. reported that when birds were vaccinated with recombinant Salmonella
ﬂagellin (rFliC) and challenged with Salmonella Enteritidis, there was a signiﬁcant reduction
in bacterial load in the liver and cecum [ 73]. A transcriptome analysis study on the
cecal mucosal immune system of layer chicks challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium
demonstrated upregulation of TLR15, TLR1A, TLR2B, and TLR7 pathways on days 3, 5,
and 7 post-infections with S.Typhimurium [ 74]. There was a measurable variation in
TLR expression in multiple regions of the intestinal tract in 2-day-old broiler birds at 24 h
post-challenge with S.Enteritidis. The infection upregulated the expression of TLR 1LA
from the ceca to the ileum, TLR2A from the duodenum to the ceca, and TLR 15, which is
unique to avians. However, there was a three-fold downregulation in the expression of
TLR 5 compared to uninfected birds [ 75]. These ﬁndings emphasize the critical role of TLRs
in the innate immune response of avians against Salmonella .
It has been reported that heterophils are integral cells of the avian innate immune sys-
tem. They are granulocytic white blood cells that are equivalent to mammalian neutrophils
and act as the ﬁrst line of defense against pathogens in the avian immune system [ 76].
The functions of heterophils include phagocytosis of both opsonized and non-opsonized
pathogens like Salmonella , degranulation of granular content, and the initiation of oxidative
burst (ROS) [ 76]. Ferro et al. demonstrated upregulation of proinﬂammatory cytokines IL-6,
IL-1, and IL-8 in heterophils of Salmonella Enteritidis-resistant one-day-old chicks compared
to infected chicks [ 77]. Toll-like receptors, including TLR1, TLR 2, TLR 3, TLR 4, TLR 5, TLR
6, TLR 7, and TLR 10 mRNA, are associated with antipathogenic defense pathways in avian
heterophils [ 78], and upregulation of TLR4, TLR15, and TLR 21 in heterophils following
Salmonella Enteritidis stimulation [ 79]. A transcriptome analysis study has shown that the
heterophil/ lymphocyte (H/L) ratio is a critical factor that determines the robustness of
the immune response in birds [ 80]. A recent study reported that the number of goblet
cells, IL-1, IL-8, and IFN- ileal expressions were all inversely linked with the H/L ratio,
suggesting that birds with low H/L ratios had improved intestinal immunity and barrier
functions [ 81]. In conclusion, these ﬁndings indicate the critical role of heterophils in de-
fense against Salmonella and facilitate its clearance. However, further research is needed to
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 9 of 27
determine whether the H/L ratio could serve as a biomarker to identify chickens resistant
toSalmonella .
5.2. Adaptive Immunity
5.2.1. CD4+ T-Cells, CD8+ T-Cells
Adaptive immunity plays a critical role in defense against intracellular pathogens like
Salmonella . In brief, T cells are key immune cells in the cell-mediated immune response.
Helper T-cells (CD4+ T-cells), cytotoxic/killer T-cells (CD8+ T-cells), and regulatory T-cells
(Tregs) are functionally distinct populations of T lymphocytes [ 66]. CD4+ T cells orchestrate
cytokine production and initiate the immune response by activating other immune cells.
Their release of IL-2 and IFN by CD4 T cells stimulates NK cells, macrophages, and
CD8-T cells and aids B cell differentiation into plasma cells. CD8+ T cells, also known as
killer/cytotoxic T cells, cause the lysis or apoptotic cell death of intracellular pathogens [ 66].
Withanage et al. reported that a Th1-mediated decrease in the bacterial load was
correlated with an upregulation in the number of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in the spleen
and liver of one-week-old Rhode Island Red chickens infected with S.Typhimurium [ 82].
Infection with Salmonella Enteritidis in laying hens has been shown to increase the numbers
of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells along with macrophages in the ovaries and oviduct around
7–14 days post-inoculation, which was followed by peak upregulation in B cells. The
reduction in the bacterial recovery rate from the ovary and oviduct around the peak
lymphocyte period indicated the involvement of cell-mediated immunity [83].
Moreover, Saenz et al. recently reported that an increased CD4+/CD8+ ratio in vacci-
nated birds challenged with three different Salmonella serovars was linked to a reduction
in cecal bacterial load [ 84]. At one week post- Salmonella Enteritidis inoculation, CD4+
and CD8+ T cells signiﬁcantly increased in the intestines of vaccinated birds compared
to unvaccinated and non-challenged birds [ 85]. In addition, another study reported an
increase in intraepithelial cytotoxic CD8+ T cells in SE-infected birds during multiple time
points during the study. However, the number of splenic cytotoxic CD8+ T-cells and splenic
helper CD4+ T-cells was comparable between the infected and uninfected birds across the
course of infection. Thus, prevention of systemic clearance of pathogens from the spleen
alone may be insufﬁcient [ 86]. Research has shown that at seven days post-infection with
SE, the CD11+ MRC1LB+ macrophage level increased in the spleen, where the bacterial
load was the highest [ 86]. The results are supported by a transgenic chicken study that
showed increased MHC-II expression levels in MRC1LB+ macrophages. This altogether
suggests the importance of increased levels of macrophages and CD4+ and CD8+ immune
cells in clearing Salmonella infection in chickens [87].
5.2.2. Regulatory T-Cells
Regulatory T cells, or T-regs, are a subset of Th cells. Chicken T-regs (CD4+ CD25+)
develop in the thymus and serve to maintain tolerance and suppress the immune response
by producing the anti-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-10 [ 66]. IL-10 functions by inhibiting
the production of IL-2 by effector T cells, which in turn suppresses the development of
an IFN -driven proinﬂammatory response against pathogens. A study with Salmonella -
challenged broiler chickens reported a signiﬁcant increase in the number of T-regs and
IL-10 mRNA expression throughout the study [ 88]. They also found that the T-regs from
infected birds suppressed T cell proliferation on days 7 and 14 post-inoculation. Moreover,
Tregs from uninfected control birds did not suppress T cell proliferation [ 88]. In conclusion,
an increase in the Treg percentage was associated with persistent S.Enteritidis infection in
the cecal tonsils of broiler birds [ 88]. Persistent S.Enteritidis and S.Heidelberg infections
were reported in chickens by the induction of CD4+CD25+ cells and by the variation in
IL-10 mRNA transcription, resulting in an asymptomatic carrier state in birds 18 days after
infection [ 89]. In vaccinated birds post-challenge with S.Enteritidis, there was a decrease
in the cellular immune response, explained by the signiﬁcantly higher levels of IL-10 at
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 10 of 27
the same time point [ 90]. Overall, these ﬁndings indicate that Tregs have an impact on
Salmonella infection in chickens.
5.2.3. Cytokines
The cells can be classiﬁed into Th1 and Th2 cells based on the types of cytokines
they produce. Th1 cells promote the proinﬂammatory cell-mediated immune response
against intracellular pathogens like Salmonella by producing interferon-gamma (IFN ),
IL-12, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). Th2 cytokines, mainly IL-10, are anti-inﬂammatory,
suppressing the Th1 response, and are associated with immune resistance to Salmonella and
Salmonella carrier states in chickens [91].
In brief, exposure of ligands to PRRs on antigen-presenting effector cells like macrophages,
dendritic cells, and B-cells causes the activation of APC, which in turn activates the naïve
T-cells. The activated T-cells differentiate into various subsets of T-helper cells [ 66]. In addition,
the production of IL-12 by activated macrophages, known as classical activation, induces the
production of IFN by T cells. The production of IFN further induces the differentiation of
T cells into Th1-type cells, marking the initiation of a cell-mediated immune response [ 66].
Earlier studies have shown that splenic IFN mRNA expression was higher in day-old chicks
exposed to Salmonella [92]. The clearance of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium from
the spleen is associated with an increase in T-cell proliferation and IFN expression [ 93].
Another pro-inflammatory cytokine, IL-1 , was related to an acute immune response against
Salmonella in young chicks [ 94]. A study demonstrated that IL-1 mRNA expression was
increased in the ilea and cecal tonsils of S.Typhimurium-inoculated birds [ 92]. Furthermore, a
transcriptome analysis study on the cecal mucosal immune system of layer chicks challenged
with S.Typhimurium found a steady upregulation in the differentially expressed genes where
IL-6 played a key role [ 74]. A study on the effects of killed S.Enteritidis vaccination in chickens
showed increased IFN and IL-2 production by spleenocytes on antigen recall responses
post-vaccination [ 95]. In birds immunized with a killed chitosan nanoparticle vaccine, the
mRNA expression of TNF- in cecal tonsils increased 0.5-fold when birds were inoculated
with Salmonella. They also reported an increase in the expression of IL-17 in the cecal tonsils
of immunized-challenged birds [96]. However, to date, no studies have reported the specific
function of Th-17 cells in the defense against Salmonella in poultry .
Chausse et al. reported that genes linked to IFN alpha/beta were inhibited in birds re-
sistant to Salmonella . In addition, they found that both carrier-state-resistant and susceptible
birds had decreased IFN gene expression, suggesting suppression of the Th1 response [ 91].
Salmonella has developed a “unique survival strategy” for long-term colonization of the
chicken intestine, resulting in persistent Salmonella infection and the development of a cecal
carrier state. It was suggested that carrier status could be associated with a Th2 response, as
indicated by the upregulation of cytokines like IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13 mRNA expression [ 91].
5.2.4. B-Cells and Immunoglobulins
B cells play a crucial role in the humoral immune response by producing antibodies.
These B cells differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells, which produce various Ig
isotypes depending on the cytokine present. For instance, IgA serves as the ﬁrst line of
defense against mucosal infections in MALT and is the most prevalent antibody on mucosal
surfaces [ 66]. The exact role of antibodies in controlling Salmonella remains unclear [ 97].
However, recent studies have identiﬁed that humoral immunity is also important in that
the enteric pathogen decreases the production of serum IgG by B cells as a mechanism to
escape from the humoral immune response. Manne et al. demonstrated that Salmonella
uses the protein SiiE to speciﬁcally decrease the number of IgG-producing plasma cells in
bone marrow, which in turn reduces serum IgG titer [ 98]. In addition, they also observed
that the SiiE-depleted strain of Salmonella had increased serum anti- Salmonella IgG [ 98].
There have been reports of a steady increase in the antigen-speciﬁc serum IgG and IgM
antibodies in birds inoculated with Salmonella Typhimurium [ 99]. In a study on chickens
looking at the impact of chemically induced B cell depletion on immunological response,
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 11 of 27
it was found that the birds with B cell deﬁciency had higher rates of intestinal Salmonella
Enteritidis shedding [ 100]. Other studies claim that the clearance of Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium infection in birds is independent of the humoral immune response.
They showed that B-cell-depleted birds had the same response as control birds to clearing
theSalmonella infection [ 101]. Withanage et al. reported that intravenous inoculation of
SE in layer birds led to peak production of IgG, IgM, and IgA antibodies around 14 days
post-inoculation, correlating with the decrease in Salmonella recovery rates during the same
period [ 94]. However, further research on the role of the humoral immune response in the
chicken immune system is needed to get a clear understanding of the efﬁciency of B-cell
and Ig repertoires in controlling Salmonella infection.
6.Salmonella Control Strategies in Poultry
6.1. Biosecurity
Implementing good biosecurity measures plays a key role in combating the transmis-
sion of Salmonella and improving food safety [ 102]. Biosecurity controls include entry-level
and site cleanliness, immunization, boot dips, and the hand hygiene of employees. In
addition, better rodent and ﬂy control, red mite control, and disinfection in between ﬂocks
are recommended to reduce the incidence of Salmonella and to halt the disease cycle in
farms [ 103]. To reduce the prevalence of D. gallinae, a biological vector of Salmonella,
appropriate biosecurity measures should be used [104].
Proper litter management has been associated with a decreased risk of Salmonella
detection in poultry houses. Moreover, higher Salmonella contamination was linked to the
use of fresh wood shavings than older litter [ 105]. Hence, proper recycling of litter using
methods like composting is crucial in reducing the Salmonella count in poultry litter [ 106].
Additionally, the use of proper disinfectants is vital in limiting the introduction and dissem-
ination of disease in birds [ 107]. Furthermore, the seroprevalence of Salmonella increased
during the summer compared to the winter season [ 108]. Hence, strict biosecurity measures
are required to combat the seasonal prevalence of Salmonella among poultry ﬂocks.
6.2. Antibiotics
Antibiotics have been used in poultry feed since the 1940s, mainly due to their ben-
eﬁts on birds’ feed efﬁciency, enhanced growth performance, and inhibition of enteric
pathogens [ 109]. The list of antibiotics used as feed additives to combat enteric pathogens
includes small quantities of penicillin, tetracycline, and chloramphenicol [ 110]. However,
the subtherapeutic use of antibiotics in poultry feed is being reconsidered because of the
growing concern about antibiotic resistance in the human food chain [ 111]. Resistant
Salmonella serotypes have been reported against antibiotics such as quinolones, chloram-
phenicol, and cephalosporins worldwide [ 112]. Moreover, control strategies like probiotics
are given importance as a viable substitute for antibiotics in light of the European Union’s
(EU) ban on their usage and the US’s restricted use of them in the production of chickens.
Additionally, the use of antibiotics is associated with the destruction of beneﬁcial gut bacte-
ria that help ﬁght enteric pathogens [ 113]. Hence, alternatives to antibiotics like probiotics,
prebiotics, synbiotics, postbiotics, etc., are given more importance in the post-antibiotic era.
6.3. Prebiotics
Prebiotics and probiotics play important roles in promoting gut health and supporting
the balance of beneﬁcial intestinal ﬂora in poultry. According to the International Scientiﬁc
Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics, prebiotics can be deﬁned as “a substrate that is
selectively utilized by host microorganisms conferring a health beneﬁt” [ 114]. The Food
and Agricultural Organization (FAO) of the United Nations (UN) deﬁned probiotics as
a “non-viable food component that confers a health beneﬁt on the host associated with
modulation of the microbiota” [115].
The prerequisite for a potential prebiotic includes the ability to withstand hydrolysis by
gastric acids and enzymes and resist absorption in the upper gastrointestinal tract [ 116]. An
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 12 of 27
ideal prebiotic should also be metabolizable by the gut microbiota, be a selective compound
that promotes the growth of beneﬁcial intestinal ﬂora, and have the capacity to regulate the
immune response in favor of the host while suppressing pathogens, thereby improving the
host’s health and performance [117].
Prebiotics like non-digestible oligosaccharides and polysaccharides have been shown
to inhibit the survival and colonization of pathogens like Salmonella by producing SCFA like
butyrate and acetate in the ceca, which helps lower the gut pH [ 118]. Yeast cell wall-derived
mannan oligosaccharides (MOS) [ 119], fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS), inulin [ 120], and
xylo-oligosaccharides [ 121] are some examples of prebiotics used in poultry production
systems to control various pathogens, including Salmonella .
The composition of the yeast cell wall includes MOS (40%), -glucan (60%), and chitin
(2%) [ 122]. Studies have demonstrated the beneﬁts of yeast cell product supplementation in
poultry diets. Shanmugasundaram et al. reported that yeast cell wall product supplementa-
tion in layer birds reduced fecal and intestinal oocyst count, up-regulated anti-inﬂammatory
cytokine IL-10 production, and increased proliferation of beneﬁcial bacteria like LAB and
their by-products of fermentation in the cecal tonsils during post-coccidial challenge [ 123].
Another study found that whole yeast cell prebiotic supplementation in the diet of broiler
birds modulates the immune response by increasing the percentage of Tregs, improving
IL-10 (anti-inﬂammatory) mRNA expression, and reducing the pro-inﬂammatory cytokine
(IL-1) mRNA expression in the cecal tonsils of broiler birds [ 124]. Supplementing broilers
with MOS (0.05%) and FOS (0.25%) signiﬁcantly improved overall body weight gains [ 125].
Dietary FOS supplementation at 1% revealed a reduction in the cecal load of Salmonella
Enteritidis, an upregulated ileal IgA cell titer, and increased expression of TLR-4 mRNA
in layer birds challenged with SE [ 126]. Broiler birds supplemented with 5% trehalose
and inoculated with Salmonella Typhimurium improved feed conversion ratio, favored
the growth of lactobacilli in jejunum and duodenum, decreased the cecal load of ST, and
decreased inﬂammation in GIT [ 127]. These results highlight the potential beneﬁts of sup-
plementing poultry diets with prebiotics as an alternative to antibiotic growth promoters for
controlling harmful bacteria like Salmonella , ultimately improving production performance
and gut health.
6.4. Probiotics
Probiotics, also known as direct-fed microbial (DFM), are deﬁned by FAO as “live
microorganisms, when administered in adequate amounts, confer a health beneﬁt on the
host” [ 128]. Lilly and Stillwell ﬁrst used the term and deﬁned probiotics as “growth-
promoting factors produced by microorganisms” [ 129]. In this context, probiotics confer
their beneﬁcial effects on the host through competitive exclusion, improving barrier health
and function, immunomodulation, and digestion and absorption, thereby promoting
growth and performance. The qualities of potential probiotic candidates are (1) host origin;
(2) non-pathogenic and beneﬁcial to the host by adhering to the gut mucosa (bioﬁlm forma-
tion); (3) tolerate of gastric acid and bile salts; (4) antimicrobial properties against pathogens;
and (5) survive post-processing and storage stress [ 130,131]. Probiotic microorganisms
used for poultry supplementation include spore-forming Bacillus spp. Saccharomyces yeast,
Enterococcus spp. [ 132],Streptococcus spp. Lactobacillus spp. and Biﬁdobacterium spp. [ 133].
The available probiotics on the market include either single-species or multispecies prepa-
rations, with the latter preferred due to its ability to act on multiple sites to bring out an
overall synergistic effect [134].
The administration of probiotics to layers of birds improved egg production, egg
weight, and egg quality [ 135]. Colonization by the Bacillus subtilis CSL2 probiotic strain
normalized the level of fecal microbiota and increased Lactobacillus inSalmonella -challenged
Hy-line Brown laying hens [ 136]. Supplementation of probiotics containing Lactobacillus
fermentum and Saccharomyces cerevisiae in broilers improved feed efﬁciency and the per-
centage of intestinal T-lymphocytes (CD4+ and CD8+) [ 137]. Continuous supplementation
ofBacillus -based probiotics restored the gut microbiota, decreased Salmonella load in the
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 13 of 27
internal organs, and increased the level of butyrate in free-laying birds challenged with
S.Typhimurium infection [ 138]. Probiotic supplementation has also been associated with
increased anti- Salmonella bile IgA in birds challenged with Salmonella , indicating improved
humoral immunity [ 139]. It has been shown that feed supplementation with Lactobacillus
spp. and Biﬁdobacterium spp. has been shown to increase the production of proinﬂamma-
tory cytokines IFN- and TNF- that favor the clearance of Salmonella from the gut [ 140].
Moreover, studies have shown that probiotic bacteria play a role in maintaining a bal-
ance between pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and anti-inﬂammatory cytokines [ 141]. Recent
studies have reported that the combination of probiotics ( Lactobacillus spp., Pediococcus
spp., Saccharomyces spp., and Bacillus spp.) with the live SE vaccine enhanced the growth
performance, decreased mortality rate, and reduced fecal shedding of bacteria in Salmonella -
challenged broilers, thereby limiting the bacterial colonization of birds [ 142]. These ﬁndings
suggest that probiotics could be a potential alternative to antibiotics in poultry infected
with Salmonella since they positively modulate the gut microbial population and enhance
the immune response against the pathogen.
However, more research needs to be performed to determine the appropriate storage
and packaging conditions for probiotics and to investigate the development of antimicrobial
resistance in the gut microbial community. Some studies suggest that probiotics may
deteriorate when exposed to temperatures higher than room temperature [143].
6.5. Synbiotics
Synbiotics refers to the synergistic combination of prebiotics and prebiotics, a concept
ﬁrst used by Gibson and Roberfroid in 1995 [ 144]. In synbiotics, prebiotics are used
to support and sustain the probiotic microorganisms by modifying the gut microﬂora,
ultimately enhancing the ability of probiotics to survive and inhibiting colonization of the
gut epithelium by pathogens. The supplementation of synbiotics has shown signiﬁcant
beneﬁts to host animals compared to using prebiotics and probiotics separately [ 145]. The
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) recommends using the term synbiotics only if
the combined health effect is synergistic [ 115]. Examples of synbiotics include combinations
like fructo-oligosaccharides with biﬁdobacteria and lactitol with lactobacilli [146].
Synbiotic supplementation has been documented to improve the production perfor-
mance and alleviate the heat stress of broiler breeders. Birds fed synbiotics showed less heat
stress behaviors than birds fed a regular diet [ 147]. Supplementation of synbiotic prepara-
tions containing Lactobacillus spp., Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast, and inulin has shown a
positive effect on the proliferation of beneﬁcial intestinal bacteria like Biﬁdobacterium spp.
and Lactobacillus spp. in broiler birds [ 148]. Shanmugasundaram et al. investigated the ef-
fect of synbiotic supplementation on the production performance, immune parameters, and
cecal Salmonella load of Salmonella -challenged layer birds. They reported improved body
weight gain, higher hen-day egg production both with and without a Salmonella challenge,
decreased cecal Salmonella colonization, and increased bile anti- Salmonella IgA [ 149]. In ad-
dition, synbiotics may help to modulate lymphoid organs (bursa, spleen), increase the size
of bursal follicles, and stimulate the immunoglobulins, thereby improving immunocompe-
tence against Salmonella Typhimurium infection in broilers [ 150]. These ﬁndings suggest
that synbiotics have promising effects and could serve as potential growth promoters in
poultry production.
6.6. Postbiotics
Postbiotics are non-viable bacterial products or metabolic byproducts, either secreted
by live bacteria or derived after cell lysis from probiotic microorganisms, that confer bene-
ﬁcial functions on the host. In general, postbiotics range from SCFA to enzymes, organic
acids (propionic and 3-phenylacetic acid), peptides, plasmalogens, vitamins, teichoic acids,
and muropeptides. Postbiotics mimic probiotics in their mode of action, except that they
are not alive [ 151]. The soluble factors are obtained from probiotic microorganisms in the
cell walls and cytoplasm, such as Lactobacillus spp., Biﬁdobacterium spp., Bacillus spp., and
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 14 of 27
Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Postbiotics beneﬁt the host by producing immunomodulatory
effects, decreasing gut pH, inhibiting pathogenic bacteria in the gut (pathogen antagonism),
enhancing antioxidant properties, enhancing gut health, protecting intestinal barrier in-
tegrity, and improving production performance [ 152]. The most common postbiotics used
are metabolites and their combinations produced by strains of Lactobacillus plantarum [153].
In the context of poultry, research has shown positive effects of postbiotics on various
aspects of health and performance. In broiler birds exposed to heat stress, the postbiotic
supplementation obtained from L. plantarum RI11 at 0.6% ( v/w) showed positive effects
on genes related to gut barrier health and reduced the expression of heat shock protein
70 genes as well as the acute phase protein genes, indicating the antioxidant function
of postbiotics [ 154]. These birds also exhibited increased growth performance, intestinal
histomorphology, a higher number of cecal microﬂora, and a negative effect on the cecal
Salmonella population following the addition of postbiotics produced by L. plantarum in
broiler birds maintained under heat stress conditions [ 155]. Dietary inclusion of postbiotics
RG14 (0.15% and 0.45%) along with prebiotics (inulin) at a concentration of 1% exhibited
improved body weight gain, a higher proportion of Biﬁdobacterium in the cecum accompa-
nied by decreased mRNA expression of interleukins LITAF (Lipopolysaccharide-induced
tumor necrosis factor-alpha factor) and IFN and reduced pathogenic bacteria like E. coli
in broilers. Nevertheless, the diet did not affect the Salmonella population [ 156]. Choe
et al. reported that supplementing layer birds with soluble metabolite combinations of
L. plantarum strains improved egg production performance, fecal population of LAB, and
intestinal villi height and crypt depth [ 157]. Additionally, postbiotics derived from Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae fermentation reduced the cecal colonization of Salmonella in broilers and
layer pullets, making them a potential preharvest intervention to enhance food safety and
improve production performance [158,159].
As antibiotic resistance becomes a growing concern, postbiotics are a potential alter-
native for combating enteric pathogens like Salmonella. They can play a valuable role in
preharvest intervention to enhance food safety practices and improve production perfor-
mance in poultry. However, further research is needed to better understand the mechanism
of action and safety of postbiotics in the poultry sector.
6.7. Phytobiotics
Phytobiotics, also known as phytogenics or phytochemicals, are biologically active
compounds obtained from plants used in animal production as feed additives because they
offer health beneﬁts and promote growth in animal production, including poultry. The
bioactive substances derived from plants include saponins, ﬂavonoids, terpenoids, and
alkaloids [ 160]. These compounds are reported to have antioxidant, antiviral, antimicro-
bial, anticoccidial, anti-parasitic, immunomodulatory, anti-inﬂammatory, and endocrine
stimulatory activities [ 161,162]. Dietary supplementation of poultry feed with garlic pow-
der [163], clove and cinnamon [164], peppermint powder [165], and ginger [166] has been
shown to improve overall production performance, feed conversion ratio, and body weight
gain. Other examples of plants used as phytobiotics include black cumin, turmeric [ 167],
calendula, oregano, green tea, and fennel, among others [168].
Supplementing a phytobiotic named Intebio in the diet of growing birds challenged
with S.Enteritidis was reported to decrease the earlier inﬂammatory response via the
downregulation of IL6, IL8L2, CASP6, and IRF7 at day 23, thereby limiting the colonization
of the pathogen [ 169]. Ziheng et al. found that oregano essential oil (OEO) supplementation
in drinking water could inhibit and treat infection by S.Pullorum and S.Gallinarum in
commercial yellow-chicken breeders. Additionally, they reported that OEO was more
effective in preventing infection than the treatment [ 170]. A diet containing 40 mgmL 1to
80 mgmL 1of garlic extract revealed antimicrobial properties in broiler chicks challenged
with S.Typhimurium by reducing mortality and improving body weight [ 171]. Phytogenic
compounds like trans -cinnamaldehyde and eugenol have decreased S.Enteritidis growth
and cecal colonization in challenged broiler birds after ten days of infection [ 172]. Moreover,
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 15 of 27
natural capsaicin derived from chili pepper has been reported to control the internal organ
(liver, spleen) invasion by S.Enteritidis in challenged layer birds [ 173]. All these studies
indicate the great potential of phytobiotics as an antimicrobial substitute against Salmonella
in poultry and its application in commercial farms.
6.8. Bacteriophages
Bacteriophages are viruses that infect bacteria and use the host machinery to proliferate
inside the host cell. These phages penetrate their DNA into the host cell (lysogenic) and
undergo multiplication, followed by the release of a large number of new bacteriophages,
eventually leading to the lysis of the bacterium to release the progeny bacteriophages.
In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA integrates into the bacterial chromosome and can
remain dormant for some time without causing cell lysis [ 174]. Bacteriophages are used
as alternatives to antibiotics due to their promising target speciﬁcity, less allergic side
effects, and harmlessness to the host’s normal ﬂora [ 175]. The treatment of S.Enteritidis-
contaminated poultry carcass with a higher number of bacteriophages was able to reduce
the percentage of recoverable bacteria by 93% [176].
The application of phage cocktail (F1055S, F12013S) as an aerosol spray on fertile eggs
challenged with S.Enteritidis during their transfer from incubators to hatchers reduced
Salmonella ’s horizontal transfer [ 177]. The inoculation bacteriophage cocktail made from
phages isolated from chickens (UAB_Phi20, UAB_Phi87) and pigs (UAB_Phi78) decreased
theSalmonella load in the cecum and mortality rate of white leghorn birds challenged with
S.Typhimurium [ 178]. The administration of CTCBIO phage signiﬁcantly reduced the
S.Enteritidis load in the cloacal swab, liver, and spleen in broilers that are challenged with
S.Enteritidis [ 179]. Broad-host-range phage (STP4-a) is beneﬁcial over speciﬁc phages
since they can inhibit multiple serovars of Salmonella with their polyvalent adsorption
sites [ 180]. Additionally, oral inoculation of S.Enteritidis and S.Typhimurium phages
reduced depression, loss of appetite, and diarrhea in a Salmonella challenge model. There is
a signiﬁcant decrease in the cecal colonization of Salmonella 7–15 days post-administration
of phages in infected chicks [ 181]. In pandrug-resistant S.Typhimurium infected chicks, a
phage combination (virulent and non-productive) enhanced the survival rate of chicks by
100%. It decreased the bacterial load in internal organs but did not improve body weight
gain, alleviate splenomegaly, or re-establish the intestinal microbiota [ 182]. These data
suggest that bacteriophage treatment could improve the survival rate of Salmonella -infected
chickens and reduce the bacterial colonization of internal organs. The poor efﬁcacy of
phage to withstand the acidic gastric pH of the birds on oral delivery is overcome by the
encapsulation technique [ 183]. However, the main disadvantage of phage therapy is the
emergence of phage resistance [184].
6.9. Vaccination against Salmonella in Poultry
6.9.1. Live-Attenuated Vaccine
Live attenuated vaccines, as the term suggests, are vaccines with living bacterial
pathogens that have been rendered inactive or avirulent using attenuation methods such
as chemical and genetically engineered mutagenesis [ 185,186]. These vaccines mimic
natural infection as they adhere to the intestinal mucosa when administered orally, eliciting
potent humoral and cell-mediated immune responses [ 185]. In newly hatched chicks
with immature immune systems, Salmonella live vaccines promote resistance to infection,
inhibiting gut colonization or competitive exclusion [187].
In a study by Lin et al., a live attenuated bivalently lyophilized vaccine containing a
ﬁnal concentration of 6 108CFU and 1 108CFU ST and SE strains, respectively, was
inoculated into commercial layers at day 5, week 8, and week 18 of age [ 188]. The birds in
different treatment groups were separately challenged with SE and ST at 25 weeks of age,
and the birds were humanely euthanized on day 14 post-challenge. Both vaccines success-
fully eliminated cloacal Salmonella shedding, as observed from cloacal swabs collected on
days 7 and 14 post-challenge. Triple vaccination with the ST vaccine signiﬁcantly reduced
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 16 of 27
the invasion of Salmonella into the internal organs like the liver, spleen, and cecum in 90%
of vaccinated birds [188].
Groves et al. showed that oral administration of a live-attenuated aroA deletion mutant
S.Typhimurium vaccine (Vaxsafe ST) at a concentration of 108CFU/250 L decreased
Salmonella load only for a temporary duration over a period of 17–25 weeks. However,
the dual administration of the same vaccine through the parenteral (subcutaneous) route
enhanced the cecal clearance of the bacteria [ 189]. In a study performed on the aroA mutant
Salmonella Typhimurium live vaccine, there were no reductions in the fecal shedding of
ST [190].
Many live attenuated vaccines are produced by mutating genes involved in crucial
virus survival and metabolism [ 191]. A previous study explored the potential of an O-
antigen-deﬁcient live attenuated Salmonella Typhimurium vaccine, created by the deletion
of the rfaL,lon, and cpxR genes, on the level of protection from systemic colonization and
immune response. The vaccine induced signiﬁcant ST-speciﬁc IgY and rapid clearance of
mutant bacterial strains from the spleen and liver in about seven days [191].
Venessa et al. immunized day-old laying–type chicks with a live Salmonella Enteri-
tidis/Typhimurium bivalent oral vaccine, followed by two booster immunizations at six
weeks and 16 weeks of age. The birds immunized with the bivalent vaccine ( Salmonella Duo)
decreased the spleen colonization of a heterologous strain of bacteria when the birds were
challenged with 4.6 108CFU of Salmonella Infantis (a heterologous strain). Hence, this
study has been shown to confer cross-protection against S.Infantis (serotype C strains) [ 192].
However, despite the ability of live-attenuated vaccines to stimulate both cell-mediated and
mucosal immune responses, the biosecurity risk of virulence reversal of the live vaccine
strain is the major drawback of live-attenuated vaccines [193].
6.9.2. Killed or Inactivated Vaccine
Killed bacterin vaccines made from inactivated whole-cell preparations of bacteria
have been extensively used to control poultry Salmonella infection [ 194]. Commonly used
inactivation agents for the preparation of killed vaccines include heat (60C for 1 h),
formaldehyde, acetone, ethylene oxide, beta-propiolactone, and radiation (ultraviolet or
gamma) [ 195]. The available Salmonella -killed vaccines are serovar-speciﬁc. Studies have
shown that killed vaccines confer humoral immunity mostly and do not elicit strong cell-
mediated immune responses. Therefore, booster vaccination is required for long-term
protection [ 196,197]. Despite the absence of robust cell-mediated immunity, killed vaccines
are preferred over live vaccines due to biosecurity and safety reasons [ 198]. Additionally,
multivalent inactivated vaccines are required to contain the spread of a wide range of
Salmonella serovars present in poultry [199,200].
An inactivated aluminum hydroxide-gel adjuvanted trivalent Salmonella enterica vac-
cine was shown to reduce the load of Salmonella Enteritidis in challenged birds by four
log CFU/g, as well as demonstrate a complete reduction in bacterial dissemination to
the liver when inoculated with Salmonella Infantis in vaccinated birds [ 194]. It has been
shown that greater levels of IgA and IgY antibodies were produced in the bile and serum
following the simultaneous use of live attenuated and killed Salmonella vaccines in broil-
ers [ 201]. The combined use of both live and killed vaccination programs successfully
reduced S.Typhimurium and S.Infantis colonization in young layers, providing broad
protection [199].
6.9.3. Subunit Vaccine
Subunit vaccines, made of deﬁned antigens, are used in poultry and are claimed
to be safer than live-attenuated or inactivated vaccines [ 193]. Vaccines derived from the
outer membrane proteins (OMPs) and ﬂagella proteins (FliC protein) of Salmonella enterica
serovar Enteritidis with adjuvants have been used to decrease bacterial shedding in poultry
and to induce a signiﬁcant antigen-speciﬁc immune response against Salmonella [202].
Additionally, a trivalent subunit cochleate system-based vaccine has been evaluated against
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 17 of 27
three serovars of Salmonella in layers. This vaccine increased serum IgY and improved
production performance [84].
Desin et al. showed the efﬁcacy of a subunit vaccine based on the Type 3 secretion
system encoded on a type 1 pathogenicity island, which showed an increased titer of IgG
antibodies in birds. Bacterial colonization in the liver was reduced but not in the spleen or
cecum [ 203]. Renu et al. experimentally designed an oral mucosal adhesive biodegradable
chitosan Salmonella subunit nanoparticle (CNP) vaccine for broilers, which successfully
elicited mucosal IgA production, lymphocyte recall assays, serum IgY antibody levels, and
conferred cross-protection against other Salmonella enterica serovars. Further, there was a
signiﬁcant reduction in Salmonella Enteritidis load in the ceca and spleen of CNP-vaccinated
birds at 21 days post-inoculation [204].
In an experimental vaccine challenge study performed to study the protective effect of
the vaccine on Salmonella serotypes, it was shown that a direct correlation exists between the
increase in serum antibodies and a decrease in bacterial loads in the intestines of vaccinated
birds [ 84]. The vaccine in the study did not affect the production performance of the
vaccinated birds. Nevertheless, the duration of the protective response and the ability of
these vaccines to confer cross-protective immunity are still unclear. However, not many
vaccine studies on layer performance post-vaccination are available.
6.9.4. Ghost Vaccine
In the past, Salmonella ghost vaccines have been extensively tested in rat models [ 205].
Bacterial ghosts are dead bacterial cell structures retaining surface antigenic LPS com-
ponents without cytoplasmic contents made from Gram-negative bacteria. The lysis of
Gram-negative bacteria mediated by the phage protein E produces bacterial ghosts [ 206].
AS.Enteritidis ghosts (SEGs) vaccine made by chemically mediated lysis was tested in
rats challenged with virulent S.Enteritidis to assess its efﬁcacy and capability to confer
immune protection. They reported a signiﬁcant increase in serum IgG antibody levels in
SEGs-vaccinated rats [205].
Moreover, further studies have studied the safety of the ghost vaccines, as the E-
gene-mediated lysis process, driven by the osmotic pressure-led bacterial cell emptying,
is reportedly inefﬁcient [ 207]. Chetan et al. studied the efﬁcacy of the S.Enteritidis (SE)
ghost vaccine, SE-LTB ghost, and a commercial vaccine. They found rapid clearance of the
bacterial load in all groups post-SE challenge and an absence of local tissue reactions at
the injection site. They also observed an increased level of IgG titer in SE-LTB-immunized
birds [208].
More recently, S.Enteritidis ghost vaccines have been produced and adjuvanted with
ST ﬂagellin antigen (ST FliC). Birds immunized with the ghost vaccine demonstrated sig-
niﬁcant clearance of the SE wild-type challenge strain from the spleen and liver, increased
serum IgY antibody levels, and an improved cell-mediated immune response [ 209]. To-
gether, the above data indicate the paramount importance of further research into ghost
vaccines as potential Salmonella vaccine candidates. However, it is important to note that
since they are non-living cells, they cannot penetrate the gut epithelium and trigger a potent
mucosal immune response, which could be a potential challenge when using the ghost
vaccine to control Salmonella in chickens.
Salmonella , an intra-phagosomal enteropathogenic bacterium, has been used as a
carrier for poultry DNA vaccines. DNA vaccines are considered safer than live vaccines
because they are based on genes of antigenic proteins ligated to a plasmid, which is then
transformed into attenuated S.Typhimurium and administered to birds [ 210]. The capacity
of attenuated S.Typhimurium to elicit strong mucosal and systemic immune responses
within the host is a beneﬁcial feature for using it as a live carrier to combat a range of
poultry viral infections [ 211,212]. Some advantages of DNA vaccines include no risk of
infection and minimal interference with passive maternal antibodies [ 213]. DNA vaccines
can be administered by intramuscular, oral, and in ovo routes in poultry [ 214]. Despite all
its beneﬁts, concerns about integrating DNA into the host genome and the development of
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 18 of 27
anti-DNA antibodies are the central claims raised against DNA vaccines [ 213]. Figure 3
summarizes the control strategies against Salmonella in poultry.
Microorganisms 2023 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  18 of 27  
 More recently, S. Enteritidis ghost vaccines have been produced and adjuvanted with 
ST flagellin antigen (ST FliC). Birds immunized with the ghost vaccine demonstrated sig-
nificant clearance of the SE wild -type challenge st rain from the spleen and liver, increased 
serum IgY antibody levels, and an improved cell -mediated immune response [209]. To-
gether, the above data indicate the paramount importance of further research into ghost 
vaccines as potential Salmonella  vaccine can didates. However, it is important to note that 
since they are non -living cells, they cannot penetrate the gut epithelium and trigger a po-
tent mucosal immune response, which could be a potential challenge when using the 
ghost vaccine to control Salmonella  in chickens.  
Salmonella , an intra -phagosomal enteropathogenic bacterium, has been used as a car-
rier for poultry DNA vaccines. DNA vaccines are considered safer than live vaccines be-
cause they are based on genes of antigenic proteins ligated to a plasmid, wh ich is then 
transformed into attenuated S. Typhimurium  and administered to  birds [210]. The capac-
ity of attenuated S. Typhimurium  to elicit strong mucosal and systemic immune responses 
within the host is a beneficial feature for using it as a live carrier to combat a range of 
poultry viral infections [211,212] . Some advantages of DNA vaccines include no risk of 
infection and minimal interference with passive maternal antibodies [213]. DNA vaccines 
can be administered by intramuscular, oral, and in  ovo routes in poultry [214]. Despite all 
its benefits, concerns about integrating DNA into the host genome and the development 
of anti-DNA antibodies are the central claims raised against DNA vaccines [213]. Figure 3 
summarizes the control strategies against Salmonella  in poultry.  
 
Figure 3. Salmonella  control strategies in poultry.  Created with Biorender.com (accessed on 26 July 
2023).  
7. Conclusions  
With the increasing global demand for poultry meat and egg products, ensuring safe 
and hygienic poultry management is critical. A multi -intervention strategy that reduces 
the Salmonella  bacterial load in birds and ultimately prevents carcass con tamination in 
processing plants should be given more importance in the current era of multi -drug-re-
sistant Salmonella . At present, there are a plethora of options claiming to reduce Salmonella 
in poultry rearing, but it is critical to exercise caution befo re implementing any of those 
Figure 3. Salmonella control strategies in poultry. Created with Biorender.com (accessed on
26 July 2023).
7. Conclusions
With the increasing global demand for poultry meat and egg products, ensuring safe
and hygienic poultry management is critical. A multi-intervention strategy that reduces
theSalmonella bacterial load in birds and ultimately prevents carcass contamination in
processing plants should be given more importance in the current era of multi-drug-
resistant Salmonella . At present, there are a plethora of options claiming to reduce Salmonella
in poultry rearing, but it is critical to exercise caution before implementing any of those
approaches on a large scale. Additionally, continuous research should be performed to
ensure the safety of all available novel control strategies. Further efforts should be made
to study alternative vaccination strategies that can promote long-lasting immunity and
understand the various virulence mechanisms of the zoonotic bacteria that can impair the
effectiveness of the immune response induced in the birds.
Author Contributions: S.S.: Writing—original draft preparation; S.S.: Writing, R.S.: review, editing,
and funding acquisition; R.K.S.: editing and funding acquisition. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was funded by USDA cooperative grant 58-6040-2-016 and hatch grant to R.K.S.
and USDA ARS award number 6040-42000-046-000D to R.S.
Data Availability Statement: No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is
not applicable to this article.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 19 of 27
References
1. Jung, B.; Park, S.; Kim, E.; Yoon, H.; Hahn, T. Salmonella Typhimurium lacking phoBR as a live vaccine candidate against poultry
infection. Vet. Microbiol. 2022 ,266, 109342. [CrossRef]
2. Majowicz, S.E.; Musto, J.; Scallan, E.; Angulo, F.J.; Kirk, M.; O’brien, S.J.; Jones, T.F.; Fazil, A.; Hoekstra, R.M. International
Collaboration on Enteric Disease “Burden of Illness” Studies. Glob. Burd. Nontyphoidal Salmonella Gastroenteritis Clin. Infect. Dis.
2010 ,50, 882–889.
3. Cosby, D.E.; Cox, N.A.; Harrison, M.A.; Wilson, J.L.; Buhr, R.J.; Fedorka-Cray, P .J. Salmonella and antimicrobial resistance in
broilers: A review. J. Appl. Poult. Res. 2015 ,24, 408–426. [CrossRef]
4. Tajkarimi, M. Salmonella spp. Calif. Dep. Food Agric. 2007 , 1–8. Available online: https://www.cdfa.ca.gov/ahfss/Animal_Health/
PHR250/2007/25007Sal.pdf (accessed on 19 June 2023).
5. Howard, Z.R.; O’Bryan, C.A.; Crandall, P .G.; Ricke, S.C. Salmonella Enteritidis in shell eggs: Current issues and prospects for
control. Food Res. Int. 2012 ,45, 755–764. [CrossRef]
6. Ricke, S.C.; Kim, S.A.; Shi, Z.; Park, S.H. Molecular-based identiﬁcation and detection of Salmonella in food production systems:
Current perspectives. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2018 ,125, 313–327. [CrossRef]
7. Chousalkar, K.; Gast, R.; Martelli, F.; Pande, V . Review of egg-related salmonellosis and reduction strategies in United States,
Australia, United Kingdom and New Zealand. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 2018 ,44, 290–303. [CrossRef]
8. Painter, J.A.; Hoekstra, R.M.; Ayers, T.; Tauxe, R.V .; Braden, C.R.; Angulo, F.J.; Grifﬁn, P .M. Attribution of foodborne illnesses,
hospitalizations, and deaths to food commodities by using outbreak data, United States, 1998–2008. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2013 ,19,
407. [CrossRef]
9. Gieraltowski, L.; Higa, J.; Peralta, V .I.; Green, A.; Schwensohn, C.; Rosen, H.; Libby, T.; Kissler, B.; Marsden-Haug, N.; Booth, H.
National outbreak of multidrug resistant Salmonella Heidelberg infections linked to a single poultry company. PLoS ONE 2016 ,
11, e0162369. [CrossRef]
10. Scharff, R.L. Food Attribution and Economic Cost Estimates for Meat- and Poultry-Related Illnesses. J. Food Prot. 2020 ,83,
959–967. [CrossRef]
11. Abd El-Hack, M.E.; El-Saadony, M.T.; Shaﬁ, M.E.; Alshahrani, O.A.; Saghir, S.A.; Al-Wajeeh, A.S.; Al-Shargi, O.Y.; Taha, A.E.;
Mesalam, N.M.; Abdel-Moneim, A.E. Prebiotics can restrict Salmonella populations in poultry: A review. Anim. Biotechnol. 2022 ,
33, 1668–1677. [CrossRef]
12. Bhunia, A.K. Salmonella enterica. In Foodborne Microbial Pathogens: Mechanisms and Pathogenesis ; Springer: New York, NY, USA,
2008; pp. 271–287.
13. Wibisono, F.M.; Wibisono, F.J.; Effendi, M.H.; Plumeriastuti, H.; Hidayatullah, A.R.; Hartadi, E.B.; Soﬁana, E.D. A review of
salmonellosis on poultry farms: Public health importance. Syst. Rev. Pharm. 2020 ,11, 481–486.
14. Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Salmonella. Available online: https://www.cdc.gov/Salmonella/index.html
(accessed on 30 June 2023).
15. O’Bryan, C.A.; Ricke, S.C.; Marcy, J.A. Public health impact of Salmonella spp. on raw poultry: Current concepts and future
prospects in the United States. Food Control 2022 ,132, 108539. [CrossRef]
16. De Reu, K.; Grijspeerdt, K.; Messens, W.; Heyndrickx, M.; Uyttendaele, M.; Debevere, J.; Herman, L. Eggshell factors inﬂuencing
eggshell penetration and whole egg contamination by different bacteria, including Salmonella enteritidis. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
2006 ,112, 253–260. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Padron, M. Salmonella typhimurium penetration through the eggshell of hatching eggs. Avian Dis. 1990 ,34, 463–465. [PubMed]
18. Kopanic, R.J., Jr.; Sheldon, B.W.; Wright, C.G. Cockroaches as vectors of Salmonella: Laboratory and ﬁeld trials. J. Food Prot. 1994 ,
57, 125–131. [CrossRef]
19. Sparagano, O. Control of poultry mites: Where do we stand? Exp. Appl. Acarol. 2009 ,48, 1–2. [CrossRef]
20. Leffer, A.M.; Kuttel, J.; Martins, L.M.; Pedroso, A.C.; Astolﬁ-Ferreira, C.S.; Ferreira, F.; Ferreira, A.J.P . Vectorial competence of
larvae and adults of Alphitobius diaperinus in the transmission of Salmonella Enteritidis in poultry. Vector-Borne Zoonotic Dis.
2010 ,10, 481–487. [CrossRef]
21. Meerburg, B.G.; Kijlstra, A. Role of rodents in transmission of Salmonella and Campylobacter. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2007 ,87,
2774–2781. [CrossRef]
22. Raufu, I.A.; Ahmed, O.A.; Aremu, A.; Odetokun, I.A.; Raji, M.A. Salmonella transmission in poultry farms: The roles of rodents,
lizards and formites. Savannah Vet. J. 2019 ,2, 1–4.
23. Hughes, L.A.; Shopland, S.; Wigley, P .; Bradon, H.; Leatherbarrow, A.H.; Williams, N.J.; Bennett, M.; de Pinna, E.; Lawson, B.;
Cunningham, A.A. Characterisation of Salmonella enterica serotype Typhimurium isolates from wild birds in northern England
from 2005–2006. BMC Vet. Res. 2008 ,4, 4. [CrossRef]
24. Alley, M.R.; Connolly, J.H.; Fenwick, S.G.; Mackereth, G.F.; Leyland, M.J.; Rogers, L.E.; Haycock, M.; Nicol, C.; Reed, C. An
epidemic of salmonellosis caused by Salmonella Typhimurium DT160 in wild birds and humans in New Zealand. N. Z. Vet. J.
2002 ,50, 170–176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Sousa, E.; Werther, K.; Berchieri J únior, A. Assessment of Newcastle and infectious bronchitis pathogens, and Salmonella spp. in
wild birds captured near poultry facilities. Arq. Bras. Med. Veterin ária Zootec. 2010 ,62, 219–223. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 20 of 27
26. Fu, Y.; M’ikanatha, N.M.; Lorch, J.M.; Blehert, D.S.; Berlowski-Zier, B.; Whitehouse, C.A.; Li, S.; Deng, X.; Smith, J.C.; Shariat, N.W.
Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium Isolates from Wild Birds in the United States Represent Distinct Lineages Deﬁned by
Bird Type. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2022 ,88, 1979. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Obukhovska, O. The natural reservoirs of Salmonella Enteritidis in populations of wild birds. Online J. Public Health Inform. 2013 ,
5. [CrossRef]
28. Authority, E.F.S. The European Union summary report on trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents and food-borne
outbreaks in 2017. EFSa J. 2018 ,16, e05500.
29. Yavari, L. Antibiotic Resistance in Salmonella enterica and the Role of Animal and Animal Food Control A literature review
of Europe and USA. 2012. Available online: https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Leila-Yavari/publication/280531461_
Antibiotic_Resistance_in_Salmonella_enterica_and_the_Role_of_Animal_and_Animal_Food_Control/links/55b7b5b608aed6
21de048679/Antibiotic-Resistance-in-Salmonella-enterica-and-the-Role-of-Animal-and-Animal-Food-Control (accessed on 3
July 2023).
30. Lüderitz, O.; Westphal, O.; Staub, A.M.; Nikaido, H. Isolation and chemical and immunological characterization of bacterial
lipopolysaccharides. Microb. Toxins 2016 ,4, 145–233.
31. Lüderitz, O.; Staub, A.M.; Westphal, O. Immunochemistry of O and R antigens of Salmonella and related Enterobacteriaceae.
Bacteriol. Rev. 1966 ,30, 192–255. [CrossRef]
32. Reeves, M.W.; Evins, G.M.; Heiba, A.A.; Plikaytis, B.D.; Farmer, J.J., 3rd. Clonal nature of Salmonella typhi and its genetic
relatedness to other salmonellae as shown by multilocus enzyme electrophoresis, and proposal of Salmonella bongori comb. nov.
J. Clin. Microbiol. 1989 ,27, 313–320. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Dworkin, M.; Falkow, S.; Rosenberg, E.; Stackebrandt, E.; Schleifer, K. The Prokaryotes: A Handbook on the Biology of Bacteria ;
Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2006; Volume 7.
34. Scallan, E.; Hoekstra, R.M.; Angulo, F.J.; Tauxe, R.V .; Widdowson, M.; Roy, S.L.; Jones, J.L.; Grifﬁn, P .M. Foodborne illness acquired
in the United States—Major pathogens. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2011 ,17, 7–15. [CrossRef]
35. Arya, G.; Holtslander, R.; Robertson, J.; Yoshida, C.; Harris, J.; Parmley, J.; Nichani, A.; Johnson, R.; Poppe, C. Epidemiology,
pathogenesis, genoserotyping, antimicrobial resistance, and prevention and control of non-typhoidal Salmonella serovars. Curr.
Clin. Microbiol. Rep. 2017 ,4, 43–53. [CrossRef]
36. Old, D.C. Nomenclature of Salmonella. J. Med. Microbiol. 1992 ,37, 361–363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Chattaway, M.A.; Langridge, G.C.; Wain, J. Salmonella nomenclature in the genomic era: A time for change. Sci. Rep. 2021 ,11,
7494. [CrossRef]
38. Grimont, P .A.; Weill, F. Antigenic formulae of the Salmonella serovars. WHO Collab. Cent. Ref. Res. Salmonella 2007 ,9, 1–166.
39. Carter, A.J.; Adams, M.R.; Woodward, M.J.; La Ragione, R.M. Control strategies for Salmonella colonization of poultry: The
probiotic perspective. Food Sci. Technol. 2009 ,5, 103–115.
40. Hickman-Brenner, F.W.; Stubbs, A.D.; Farmer, J.J., 3rd. Phage typing of Salmonella enteritidis in the United States. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 1991 ,29, 2817–2823. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Bhatta, D.R.; Bangtrakulnonth, A.; Tishyadhigama, P .; Saroj, S.D.; Bandekar, J.R.; Hendriksen, R.S.; Kapadnis, B.P . Serotyping,
PCR, phage-typing and antibiotic sensitivity testing of Salmonella serovars isolated from urban drinking water supply systems of
Nepal. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2007 ,44, 588–594. [CrossRef]
42. Crabb, H.K.; Allen, J.L.; Devlin, J.M.; Firestone, S.M.; Stevenson, M.; Wilks, C.R.; Gilkerson, J.R. Traditional Salmonella
Typhimurium typing tools (phage typing and MLVA) are sufﬁcient to resolve well-deﬁned outbreak events only. Food Microbiol.
2019 ,84, 103237. [CrossRef]
43. Ha, A.J.; Perez, L.G.S.; Kim, T.; Mizan, M.F.R.; Nahar, S.; Park, S.; Chun, H.; Ha, S. Research Note: Identiﬁcation and characteriza-
tion of Salmonella spp. in mechanically deboned chickens using pulsed-ﬁeld gel electrophoresis. Poult. Sci. 2021 ,100, 100961.
[CrossRef]
44. Khan, S.A.; Foley, S.; Stefanova, R. Subtyping of Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhimurium from Clinical Samples by Multiple-
Locus Variable-Number Tandem Repeat Analysis and Pulsed-Field Gel Electrophoresis. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2019 ,3, 1–7.
[CrossRef]
45. Mechesso, A.F.; Moon, D.C.; Kim, S.; Song, H.; Kang, H.Y.; Na, S.H.; Choi, J.; Kim, H.; Yoon, S.; Lim, S. Nationwide surveillance
on serotype distribution and antimicrobial resistance proﬁles of non-typhoidal Salmonella serovars isolated from food-producing
animals in South Korea. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2020 ,335, 108893. [CrossRef]
46. Ferrato, C.; Chui, L.; King, R.; Louie, M. Utilization of a molecular serotyping method for Salmonella enterica in a routine
laboratory in Alberta Canada. J. Microbiol. Methods 2017 ,135, 14–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Mortimer, C.K.; Peters, T.M.; Gharbia, S.E.; Logan, J.M.; Arnold, C. Towards the development of a DNA-sequence based approach
to serotyping of Salmonella enterica. BMC Microbiol. 2004 ,4, 31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Diep, B.; Barretto, C.; Portmann, A.; Fournier, C.; Karczmarek, A.; Voets, G.; Li, S.; Deng, X.; Klijn, A. Salmonella serotyping;
comparison of the traditional method to a microarray-based method and an in silico platform using whole genome sequencing
data. Front. Microbiol. 2019 ,10, 2554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Higginson, E.E.; Simon, R.; Tennant, S.M. Animal models for salmonellosis: Applications in vaccine research. Clin. Vaccine
Immunol. 2016 ,23, 746–756. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 21 of 27
50. Broz, P .; Ohlson, M.B.; Monack, D.M. Innate immune response to Salmonella typhimurium, a model enteric pathogen. Gut
Microbes 2012 ,3, 62–70. [CrossRef]
51. Kobayashi, N.; Takahashi, D.; Takano, S.; Kimura, S.; Hase, K. The roles of Peyer’s patches and microfold cells in the gut immune
system: Relevance to autoimmune diseases. Front. Immunol. 2019 ,10, 2345. [CrossRef]
52. Buchmeier, N.A.; Heffron, F. Inhibition of macrophage phagosome-lysosome fusion by Salmonella typhimurium. Infect. Immun.
1991 ,59, 2232–2238. [CrossRef]
53. Velge, P .; Cloeckaert, A.; Barrow, P . Emergence of Salmonella epidemics: The problems related to Salmonella enterica serotyp
Enteritidis and multiple antibiotic resistance in other major serotypes. Vet. Res. 2005 ,36, 267–288. [CrossRef]
54. World Health Organization. Background Document: The Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention of Typhoid Fever ; World Health
Organization: Geneva, Switzerland, 2003.
55. Coburn, B.; Grassl, G.A.; Finlay, B.B. Salmonella, the host and disease: A brief review. Immunol. Cell Biol. 2007 ,85, 112–118.
[CrossRef]
56. Bhunia, A.K. Foodborne Microbial Pathogens: Mechanisms and Pathogenesis ; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2018.
57. Knuff, K.; Finlay, B.B. What the SIF is happening—The role of intracellular Salmonella-induced ﬁlaments. Front. Cell. Infect.
Microbiol. 2017 ,7, 335. [CrossRef]
58. McGourty, K.; Thurston, T.L.; Matthews, S.A.; Pinaud, L.; Mota, L.J.; Holden, D.W. Salmonella inhibits retrograde trafﬁcking of
mannose-6-phosphate receptors and lysosome function. Science 2012 ,338, 963–967. [CrossRef]
59. Tahoun, A.; Mahajan, S.; Paxton, E.; Malterer, G.; Donaldson, D.S.; Wang, D.; Tan, A.; Gillespie, T.L.; O’Shea, M.; Roe, A.J.
Salmonella transforms follicle-associated epithelial cells into M cells to promote intestinal invasion. Cell Host Microbe 2012 ,12,
645–656. [CrossRef]
60. Dieye, Y.; Ameiss, K.; Mellata, M.; Curtiss, R. The Salmonella Pathogenicity Island (SPI) 1 contributes more than SPI2 to the
colonization of the chicken by Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. BMC Microbiol. 2009 ,9, 3. [CrossRef]
61. Jones, M.A.; Hulme, S.D.; Barrow, P .A.; Wigley, P . The Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 and Salmonella pathogenicity island
2 type III secretion systems play a major role in pathogenesis of systemic disease and gastrointestinal tract colonization of
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in the chicken. Avian Pathol. 2007 ,36, 199–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Pico-Rodr íguez, J.T.; Mart ínez-Jarqu ín, H.; G ómez-Ch ávez, J.D.J.; Ju árez-Ram írez, M.; Mart ínez-Chavarr ía, L.C. Effect of
Salmonella pathogenicity island 1 and 2 (SPI-1 and SPI-2) deletion on intestinal colonization and systemic dissemination in
chickens. Vet. Res. Commun. 2023 , 1–12. [CrossRef]
63. Merino, L.; Trejo, F.M.; De Antoni, G.; Golowczyc, M.A. Lactobacillus strains inhibit bioﬁlm formation of Salmonella sp. isolates
from poultry. Food Res. Int. 2019 ,123, 258–265. [CrossRef]
64. Barrow, P .A. Salmonella infections: Immune and non-immune protection with vaccines. Avian Pathol. 2007 ,36, 1–13. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
65. Mon, K.K.; Zhu, Y.; Chanthavixay, G.; Kern, C.; Zhou, H. Integrative analysis of gut microbiome and metabolites revealed novel
mechanisms of intestinal Salmonella carriage in chicken. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 4809. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Abbas, A.; Lichtman, A.; Pillai, S. Cellular and Molecular Immunology E-Book ; Elsevier Health Sciences: Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands, 2014.
67. Brisbin, J.T.; Gong, J.; Sharif, S. Interactions between commensal bacteria and the gut-associated immune system of the chicken.
Anim. Health Res. Rev. 2008 ,9, 101–110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Stanley, D.; Geier, M.S.; Hughes, R.J.; Denman, S.E.; Moore, R.J. Highly variable microbiota development in the chicken
gastrointestinal tract. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e84290. [CrossRef]
69. Muir, W.I.; Bryden, W.L.; Husband, A.J. Immunity, vaccination and the avian intestinal tract. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 2000 ,24,
325–342. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70. Lillehoj, H.S.; Trout, J.M. Avian gut-associated lymphoid tissues and intestinal immune responses to Eimeria parasites. Clin.
Microbiol. Rev. 1996 ,9, 349–360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Temperley, N.D.; Berlin, S.; Paton, I.R.; Grifﬁn, D.K.; Burt, D.W. Evolution of the chicken Toll-like receptor gene family: A story of
gene gain and gene loss. BMC Genom. 2008 ,9, 62. [CrossRef]
72. Werling, D.; Hope, J.C.; Howard, C.J.; Jungi, T.W. Differential production of cytokines, reactive oxygen and nitrogen by bovine
macrophages and dendritic cells stimulated with Toll-like receptor agonists. Immunology 2004 ,111, 41–52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Okamura, M.; Matsumoto, W.; Seike, F.; Tanaka, Y.; Teratani, C.; Tozuka, M.; Kashimoto, T.; Takehara, K.; Nakamura, M.;
Yoshikawa, Y. Efﬁcacy of soluble recombinant FliC protein from Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis as a potential vaccine
candidate against homologous challenge in chickens. Avian Dis. 2012 ,56, 354–358. [CrossRef]
74. Khan, S.; Chousalkar, K.K. Transcriptome proﬁling analysis of caeca in chicks challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium reveals
differential expression of genes involved in host mucosal immune response. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2020 ,104, 9327–9342.
[CrossRef]
75. MacKinnon, K.M.; He, H.; Nerren, J.R.; Swaggerty, C.L.; Genovese, K.J.; Kogut, M.H. Expression proﬁle of toll-like receptors
within the gastrointestinal tract of 2-day-old Salmonella enteriditis-infected broiler chickens. Vet. Microbiol. 2009 ,137, 313–319.
[CrossRef]
76. Genovese, K.J.; He, H.; Swaggerty, C.L.; Kogut, M.H. The avian heterophil. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 2013 ,41, 334–340. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 22 of 27
77. Ferro, P .J.; Swaggerty, C.L.; Kaiser, P .; Pevzner, I.Y.; Kogut, M.H. Heterophils isolated from chickens resistant to extra-intestinal
Salmonella enteritidis infection express higher levels of pro-inﬂammatory cytokine mRNA following infection than heterophils
from susceptible chickens. Epidemiol. Infect. 2004 ,132, 1029–1037. [CrossRef]
78. Kogut, M.H.; Iqbal, M.; He, H.; Philbin, V .; Kaiser, P .; Smith, A. Expression and function of Toll-like receptors in chicken
heterophils. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 2005 ,29, 791–807. [CrossRef]
79. Kogut, M.H.; Chiang, H.; Swaggerty, C.L.; Pevzner, I.Y.; Zhou, H. Gene expression analysis of Toll-like receptor pathways in
heterophils from genetic chicken lines that differ in their susceptibility to Salmonella enteritidis. Front. Genet. 2012 ,3, 121.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Jie, W.; Zhang, Q.; S ánchez, A.L.B.; Bo, Z.; Qiao, W.; Zheng, M.; Li, Q.; Cui, H.; Jie, W.; Zhao, G. Transcriptome analysis of the
spleen of heterophils to lymphocytes ratio-selected chickens revealed their mechanism of differential resistance to Salmonella. J.
Integr. Agric. 2022 ,21, 2372–2383.
81. Thiam, M.; Barreto S ánchez, A.L.; Zhang, J.; Zheng, M.; Wen, J.; Zhao, G.; Wang, Q. Association of heterophil/lymphocyte
ratio with intestinal barrier function and immune response to salmonella enteritidis infection in chicken. Animals 2021 ,11, 3498.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Withanage, G.; Wigley, P .; Kaiser, P .; Mastroeni, P .; Brooks, H.; Powers, C.; Beal, R.; Barrow, P .; Maskell, D.; McConnell, I. Cytokine
and chemokine responses associated with clearance of a primary Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection in the
chicken and in protective immunity to rechallenge. Infect. Immun. 2005 ,73, 5173–5182. [CrossRef]
83. Withanage, G.; Sasai, K.; Fukata, T.; Miyamoto, T.; Lillehoj, H.S.; Baba, E. Increased lymphocyte subpopulations and macrophages
in the ovaries and oviducts of laying hens infected with Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis. Avian Pathol. 2003 ,32, 583–590.
[CrossRef]
84. Sáenz, L.; Guzm án, M.; Vidal, S.; Caruffo, M.; Siel, D.; Zayas, C.; Paredes, R.; Valenzuela, C.; Hidalgo, H.; P érez, O. Efﬁcacy of
multivalent, cochleate-based vaccine against Salmonella Infantis, S.Enteritidis and S.Typhimurium in laying hens. Vaccines 2022 ,
10, 226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Schokker, D.; Peters, T.; Hoekman, A.; Rebel, J.; Smits, M.A. Differences in the early response of hatchlings of different chicken
breeding lines to Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis infection. Poult. Sci. 2012 ,91, 346–353. [CrossRef]
86. Meijerink, N.; Van den Biggelaar, R.H.; Van Haarlem, D.A.; Stegeman, J.A.; Rutten, V .P .; Jansen, C.A. A detailed analysis of innate
and adaptive immune responsiveness upon infection with Salmonella enterica serotype Enteritidis in young broiler chickens. Vet.
Res. 2021 ,52, 1–21. [CrossRef]
87. Sutton, K.M.; Morris, K.M.; Borowska, D.; Sang, H.; Kaiser, P .; Balic, A.; Vervelde, L. Characterization of conventional dendritic
cells and macrophages in the spleen using the CSF1R-reporter transgenic chickens. Front. Immunol. 2021 ,12, 636436. [CrossRef]
88. Shanmugasundaram, R.; Kogut, M.H.; Arsenault, R.J.; Swaggerty, C.L.; Cole, K.; Reddish, J.M.; Selvaraj, R.K. Effect of Salmonella
infection on cecal tonsil regulatory T cell properties in chickens. Poult. Sci. 2015 ,94, 1828–1835. [CrossRef]
89. Shanmugasundaram, R.; Acevedo, K.; Mortada, M.; Akerele, G.; Applegate, T.J.; Kogut, M.H.; Selvaraj, R.K. Effects of Salmonella
enterica ser. Enteritidis and Heidelberg on host CD4 CD25 regulatory T cell suppressive immune responses in chickens. PLoS
ONE 2021 ,16, e0260280. [CrossRef]
90. Penha Filho, R.A.C.; Moura, B.S.; de Almeida, A.M.; Montassier, H.J.; Barrow, P .A.; Junior, A.B. Humoral and cellular immune
response generated by different vaccine programs before and after Salmonella Enteritidis challenge in chickens. Vaccine 2012 ,30,
7637–7643. [CrossRef]
91. Chauss é, A.; Gr épinet, O.; Bottreau, E.; Robert, V .; Hennequet-Antier, C.; Lalmanach, A.; Lecardonnel, J.; Beaumont, C.; Velge, P .
Susceptibility to Salmonella carrier-state: A possible Th2 response in susceptible chicks. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 2014 ,159,
16–28. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Cheeseman, J.H. Avian Immunology, Immunogenetics, and Host Immune Response to Salmonella Enterica Serovar Enteritidis Infection in
Chickens ; Iowa State University: Ames, IA, USA, 2007.
93. Beal, R.K.; Wigley, P .; Powers, C.; Hulme, S.D.; Barrow, P .A.; Smith, A.L. Age at primary infection with Salmonella enterica
serovar Typhimurium in the chicken inﬂuences persistence of infection and subsequent immunity to re-challenge. Vet. Immunol.
Immunopathol. 2004 ,100, 151–164. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Withanage, G.; Sasai, K.; Fukata, T.; Miyamoto, T.; Baba, E.; Lillehoj, H.S. T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and macrophages in the
ovaries and oviducts of laying hens experimentally infected with Salmonella enteritidis. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 1998 ,66,
173–184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Okamura, M.; Lillehoj, H.S.; Raybourne, R.B.; Babu, U.S.; Heckert, R.A. Cell-mediated immune responses to a killed Salmonella
enteritidis vaccine: Lymphocyte proliferation, T-cell changes and interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1, IL-2, and IFN- production. Comp.
Immunol. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 2004 ,27, 255–272. [CrossRef]
96. Xu, S.; Cao, X. Interleukin-17 and its expanding biological functions. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 2010 ,7, 164–174. [CrossRef]
97. Restif, O.; Goh, Y.S.; Palayret, M.; Grant, A.J.; McKinley, T.J.; Clark, M.R.; Mastroeni, P . Quantiﬁcation of the effects of antibodies
on the extra-and intracellular dynamics of Salmonella enterica. J. R. Soc. Interface 2013 ,10, 20120866. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Männe, C.; Takaya, A.; Yamasaki, Y.; Mursell, M.; Hojyo, S.; Wu, T.; Sarkander, J.; McGrath, M.A.; Cornelis, R.; Hahne, S.
Salmonella SiiE prevents an efﬁcient humoral immune memory by interfering with IgG plasma cell persistence in the bone
marrow. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2019 ,116, 7425–7430. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 23 of 27
99. Dar, M.A.; Urwat, U.; Ahmad, S.M.; Ahmad, R.; Kashoo, Z.A.; Dar, T.A.; Bhat, S.A.; Mumtaz, P .T.; Shabir, N.; Shah, R.A. Gene
expression and antibody response in chicken against Salmonella Typhimurium challenge. Poult. Sci. 2019 ,98, 2008–2013.
[CrossRef]
100. Arnold, J.W.; Holt, P .S. Response to Salmonella enteritidis infection by the immunocompromised avian host. Poult. Sci. 1995 ,74,
656–665. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Beal, R.K.; Powers, C.; Davison, T.F.; Barrow, P .A.; Smith, A.L. Clearance of enteric Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium in
chickens is independent of B-cell function. Infect. Immun. 2006 ,74, 1442–1444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Fraser, R.W.; Williams, N.T.; Powell, L.F.; Cook, A. Reducing Campylobacter and salmonella infection: Two studies of the
economic cost and attitude to adoption of on-farm biosecurity measures. Zoonoses Public Health 2010 ,57, e109–e115. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
103. Gosling, R.J.; Martelli, F.; Wintrip, A.; Sayers, A.R.; Wheeler, K.; Davies, R.H. Assessment of producers’ response to Salmonella
biosecurity issues and uptake of advice on laying hen farms in England and Wales. Br. Poult. Sci. 2014 ,55, 559–568. [CrossRef]
104. Sylejmani, D.; Musliu, A.; Ramadani, N.; Sparagano, O.; Hamidi, A. Associations between the level of biosecurity and occurrence
of Dermanyssus gallinae and Salmonella spp. in layer farms. Avian Dis. 2016 ,60, 454–459. [CrossRef]
105. Volkova, V .V .; Wills, R.W.; Hubbard, S.A.; Magee, D.L.; Byrd, J.A.; Bailey, R.H. Risk factors associated with detection of Salmonella
in broiler litter at the time of new ﬂock placement. Zoonoses Public Health 2011 ,58, 158–168. [CrossRef]
106. Eid, S.; Hassan, H.M.; Al-Atfeehy, N.M.; Selim, K.M.; El Oksh, A.S. Composting: A biosecurity measure to maximize the beneﬁt
of broilers’ litter. Anim. Res. 2023 ,10, 458–468. [CrossRef]
107. Abdulghaffar, T.A.; El Bahgy, H.E. Effect of some disinfectants on some pathogenic microorganisms isolated from poultry farm.
Benha Vet. Med. J. 2016 ,31, 154–158.
108. Meher, M.M.; Sharif, M.A.; Al Bayazid, A. Seroprevalence of Salmonella spp. infection in different types of poultry and biosecurity
measures associated with Salmonellosis. Int. J. Agric. Environ. Food Sci. 2022 ,6, 557–567. [CrossRef]
109. Alagawany, M.; Abd El-Hack, M.E.; Farag, M.R.; Sachan, S.; Karthik, K.; Dhama, K. The use of probiotics as eco-friendly
alternatives for antibiotics in poultry nutrition. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2018 ,25, 10611–10618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Marshall, B.M.; Levy, S.B. Food animals and antimicrobials: Impacts on human health. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 2011 ,24, 718–733.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Eckert, N.H.; Lee, J.T.; Hyatt, D.; Stevens, S.M.; Anderson, S.; Anderson, P .N.; Beltran, R.; Schatzmayr, G.; Mohnl, M.; Caldwell, D.J.
Inﬂuence of probiotic administration by feed or water on growth parameters of broilers reared on medicated and nonmedicated
diets. J. Appl. Poult. Res. 2010 ,19, 59–67. [CrossRef]
112. Karon, A.E.; Archer, J.R.; Sotir, M.J.; Monson, T.A.; Kazmierczak, J.J. Human multidrug-resistant Salmonella newport infections,
Wisconsin, 2003–2005. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 2007 ,13, 1777. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Palamidi, I.; Fegeros, K.; Mohnl, M.; Abdelrahman, W.; Schatzmayr, G.; Theodoropoulos, G.; Mountzouris, K.C. Probiotic form
effects on growth performance, digestive function, and immune related biomarkers in broilers. Poult. Sci. 2016 ,95, 1598–1608.
[CrossRef]
114. Gibson, G.R.; Hutkins, R.; Sanders, M.E.; Prescott, S.L.; Reimer, R.A.; Salminen, S.J.; Scott, K.; Stanton, C.; Swanson, K.S.; Cani, P .D.
Expert consensus document: The International Scientiﬁc Association for Probiotics and Prebiotics (ISAPP) consensus statement
on the deﬁnition and scope of prebiotics. Nat. Rev. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2017 ,14, 491–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Pineiro, M.; Asp, N.; Reid, G.; Macfarlane, S.; Morelli, L.; Brunser, O.; Tuohy, K. FAO Technical meeting on prebiotics. J. Clin.
Gastroenterol. 2008 ,42, S156–S159. [CrossRef]
116. Ricke, S.C.; Lee, S.I.; Kim, S.A.; Park, S.H.; Shi, Z. Prebiotics and the poultry gastrointestinal tract microbiome. Poult. Sci. 2020 ,99,
670–677. [CrossRef]
117. Hajati, H.; Rezaei, M. The application of prebiotics in poultry production. Int. J. Poult. Sci. 2010 ,9, 298–304. [CrossRef]
118. Bogusławska-Tryk, M.; Piotrowska, A.; Burlikowska, K. Dietary fructans and their potential beneﬁcial inﬂuence on health and
performance parametrs in broiler chickens. J. Cent. Eur. Agric. 2012 ,13. Available online: https://hrcak.srce.hr/83284 (accessed
on 10 November 2023). [CrossRef]
119. Fomentini, M.; Haese, D.; Kill, J.L.; Sobreiro, R.P .; Puppo, D.D.; Haddade, I.R.; Lima, A.L.; Saraiva, A. Prebiotic and antimicrobials
on performance, carcass characteristics, and antibody production in broilers. Ciência Rural 2016 ,46, 1070–1075. [CrossRef]
120. Adhikari, P .A.; Kim, W.K. Overview of prebiotics and probiotics: Focus on performance, gut health and immunity—A review.
Ann. Anim. Sci. 2017 ,17, 949–966. [CrossRef]
121. Pourabedin, M.; Guan, L.; Zhao, X. Xylo-oligosaccharides and virginiamycin differentially modulate gut microbial composition
in chickens. Microbiome 2015 ,3, 15. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Fathima, S.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Sifri, M.; Selvaraj, R. Yeasts and Yeast-based Products in Poultry Nutrition. J. Appl. Poult.
Res. 2023 ,32, 100345. [CrossRef]
123. Markazi, A.D.; Perez, V .; Sifri, M.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Selvaraj, R.K. Effect of whole yeast cell product supplementation
(CitriStim®) on immune responses and cecal microﬂora species in pullet and layer chickens during an experimental coccidial
challenge. Poult. Sci. 2017 ,96, 2049–2056. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
124. Shanmugasundaram, R.; Selvaraj, R.K. Effect of killed whole yeast cell prebiotic supplementation on broiler performance and
intestinal immune cell parameters. Poult. Sci. 2012 ,91, 107–111. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 24 of 27
125. Kim, G.; Seo, Y.M.; Kim, C.H.; Paik, I.K. Effect of dietary prebiotic supplementation on the performance, intestinal microﬂora, and
immune response of broilers. Poult. Sci. 2011 ,90, 75–82. [CrossRef]
126. Adhikari, P .; Cosby, D.E.; Cox, N.A.; Franca, M.S.; Williams, S.M.; Gogal, R.M., Jr.; Ritz, C.W.; Kim, W.K. Effect of dietary
fructooligosaccharide supplementation on internal organs Salmonella colonization, immune response, ileal morphology, and ileal
immunohistochemistry in laying hens challenged with Salmonella enteritidis. Poult. Sci. 2018 ,97, 2525–2533. [CrossRef]
127. Wu, Y.; Yang, W.; Wu, Y.S.; Chen, J.; Chen, Y. Modulations of growth performance, gut microbiota, and inﬂammatory cytokines by
trehalose on Salmonella Typhimurium-challenged broilers. Poult. Sci. 2020 ,99, 4034–4043. [CrossRef]
128. Morelli, L.; Capurso, L. FAO/WHO guidelines on probiotics: 10 years later. J. Clin. Gastroenterol. 2012 ,46, S1–S2. [CrossRef]
129. Lilly, D.M.; Stillwell, R.H. Probiotics: Growth-promoting factors produced by microorganisms. Science 1965 ,147, 747–748.
[CrossRef]
130. Sánchez, B.; Delgado, S.; Blanco-M íguez, A.; Lourenço, A.; Gueimonde, M.; Margolles, A. Probiotics, gut microbiota, and their
inﬂuence on host health and disease. Mol. Nutr. Food Res. 2017 ,61, 1600240. [CrossRef]
131. Fathima, S.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Adams, D.; Selvaraj, R.K. Gastrointestinal microbiota and their manipulation for improved
growth and performance in chickens. Foods 2022 ,11, 1401. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Simon, O.; Jadamus, A.; Vahjen, W. Probiotic feed additives-effectiveness and expected modes of action. J. Anim. Feed. Sci. 2001 ,
10, 51–68. [CrossRef]
133. Kabir, S.L.; Rahman, M.M.; Rahman, M.B.; Rahman, M.M.; Ahmed, S.U. The dynamics of probiotics on growth performance and
immune response in broilers. Int. J. Poult. Sci. 2004 ,3, 361–364.
134. Krysiak, K.; Konkol, D.; Korczy ´ nski, M. Overview of the use of probiotics in poultry production. Animals 2021 ,11, 1620. [CrossRef]
135. Menconi, A.; Kallapura, G.; Latorre, J.D.; Morgan, M.J.; Pumford, N.R.; Hargis, B.M.; Tellez, G. Identiﬁcation and characterization
of lactic acid bacteria in a commercial probiotic culture. Biosci. Microbiota Food Health 2014 ,33, 25–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
136. Oh, J.K.; Pajarillo, E.A.B.; Chae, J.P .; Kim, I.H.; Kang, D. Protective effects of Bacillus subtilis against Salmonella infection in the
microbiome of Hy-Line Brown layers. Asian-Australas. J. Anim. Sci. 2017 ,30, 1332. [CrossRef]
137. Bai, S.P .; Wu, A.M.; Ding, X.M.; Lei, Y.; Bai, J.; Zhang, K.Y.; Chio, J.S. Effects of probiotic-supplemented diets on growth
performance and intestinal immune characteristics of broiler chickens. Poult. Sci. 2013 ,92, 663–670. [CrossRef]
138. Khan, S.; Chousalkar, K.K. Salmonella Typhimurium infection disrupts but continuous feeding of Bacillus based probiotic restores
gut microbiota in infected hens. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 2020 ,11, 29. [CrossRef]
139. Shanmugasundaram, R.; Applegate, T.J.; Selvaraj, R.K. Effect of Bacillus subtilis and Bacillus licheniformis probiotic supplementa-
tion on cecal Salmonella load in broilers challenged with salmonella. J. Appl. Poult. Res. 2020 ,29, 808–816. [CrossRef]
140. El-Sharkawy, H.; Tahoun, A.; Rizk, A.M.; Suzuki, T.; Elmonir, W.; Nassef, E.; Shukry, M.; Germoush, M.O.; Farrag, F.; Bin-Jumah,
M. Evaluation of Biﬁdobacteria and Lactobacillus probiotics as alternative therapy for Salmonella typhimurium infection in
broiler chickens. Animals 2020 ,10, 1023. [CrossRef]
141. Menconi, A.; Bielke, L.R.; Hargis, B.M.; Tellez, G. Immuno-modulation and anti-inﬂammatory effects of antibiotic growth
promoters versus probiotics in the intestinal tract. J. Microbiol. Res. Rev. 2014 ,2, 62–67.
142. El-Shall, N.A.; Awad, A.M.; El-Hack, M.E.A.; Naiel, M.A.; Othman, S.I.; Allam, A.A.; Sedeik, M.E. The simultaneous administra-
tion of a probiotic or prebiotic with live Salmonella vaccine improves growth performance and reduces fecal shedding of the
bacterium in Salmonella-challenged broilers. Animals 2019 ,10, 70. [CrossRef]
143. Dianawati, D.; Mishra, V .; Shah, N.P . Effect of drying methods of microencapsulated Lactobacillus acidophilus and Lactococcus
lactis ssp. cremoris on secondary protein structure and glass transition temperature as studied by Fourier transform infrared and
differential scanning calorimetry. J. Dairy Sci. 2013 ,96, 1419–1430. [CrossRef]
144. Gibson, G.R.; Roberfroid, M.B. Dietary modulation of the human colonic microbiota: Introducing the concept of prebiotics. J.
Nutr. 1995 ,125, 1401–1412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
145. Khomayezi, R.; Adewole, D. Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics: An overview of their delivery routes and effects on growth
and health of broiler chickens. Worlds Poult. Sci. J. 2022 ,78, 57–81. [CrossRef]
146. Yadav, A.S.; Kolluri, G.; Gopi, M.; Karthik, K.; Singh, Y. Exploring alternatives to antibiotics as health promoting agents in
poultry—A review. J. Exp. Biol. 2016 ,4, 368–383.
147. Mohammed, A.A.; Jacobs, J.A.; Murugesan, G.R.; Cheng, H.W. Effect of dietary synbiotic supplement on behavioral patterns and
growth performance of broiler chickens reared under heat stress. Poult. Sci. 2018 ,97, 1101–1108. [CrossRef]
148. ´Sli˙zewska, K.; Markowiak-Kope´ c, P .; ˙Zbikowski, A.; Szeleszczuk, P . The effect of synbiotic preparations on the intestinal
microbiota and her metabolism in broiler chickens. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 4281. [CrossRef]
149. Luoma, A.; Markazi, A.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Murugesan, G.R.; Mohnl, M.; Selvaraj, R. Effect of synbiotic supplementation
on layer production and cecal Salmonella load during a Salmonella challenge. Poult. Sci. 2017 ,96, 4208–4216. [CrossRef]
150. Villagr án-de la Mora, Z.; V ázquez-Paulino, O.; Avalos, H.; Ascencio, F.; Nuño, K.; Villarruel-L ópez, A. Effect of a synbiotic mix on
lymphoid organs of broilers infected with salmonella typhimurium and clostridium perfringens. Animals 2020 ,10, 886. [CrossRef]
151. Aguilar-Toal á, J.E.; Garcia-Varela, R.; Garcia, H.S.; Mata-Haro, V .; Gonz ález-C órdova, A.F.; Vallejo-Cordoba, B.; Hern ández-
Mendoza, A. Postbiotics: An evolving term within the functional foods ﬁeld. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2018 ,75, 105–114.
[CrossRef]
152. Abd El-Ghany, W.A. Paraprobiotics and postbiotics: Contemporary and promising natural antibiotics alternatives and their
applications in the poultry ﬁeld. Open Vet. J. 2020 ,10, 323–330. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 25 of 27
153. Van Thu, T.; Foo, H.L.; Loh, T.C.; Bejo, M.H. Inhibitory activity and organic acid concentrations of metabolite combinations
produced by various strains of Lactobacillus plantarum. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2011 ,10, 1359–1363.
154. Humam, A.M.; Loh, T.C.; Foo, H.L.; Izuddin, W.I.; Zulkiﬂi, I.; Samsudin, A.A.; Mustapha, N.M. Supplementation of postbiotic
RI11 improves antioxidant enzyme activity, upregulated gut barrier genes, and reduced cytokine, acute phase protein, and heat
shock protein 70 gene expression levels in heat-stressed broilers. Poult. Sci. 2021 ,100, 100908. [CrossRef]
155. Humam, A.M.; Loh, T.C.; Foo, H.L.; Samsudin, A.A.; Mustapha, N.M.; Zulkiﬂi, I.; Izuddin, W.I. Effects of feeding different
postbiotics produced by Lactobacillus plantarum on growth performance, carcass yield, intestinal morphology, gut microbiota
composition, immune status, and growth gene expression in broilers under heat stress. Animals 2019 ,9, 644. [CrossRef]
156. Kareem, K.Y.; Loh, T.C.; Foo, H.L.; Asmara, S.A.; Akit, H. Inﬂuence of postbiotic RG14 and inulin combination on cecal microbiota,
organic acid concentration, and cytokine expression in broiler chickens. Poult. Sci. 2017 ,96, 966–975. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
157. Choe, D.W.; Loh, T.C.; Foo, H.L.; Hair-Bejo, M.; Awis, Q.S. Egg production, faecal pH and microbial population, small intestine
morphology, and plasma and yolk cholesterol in laying hens given liquid metabolites produced by Lactobacillus plantarum
strains. Br. Poult. Sci. 2012 ,53, 106–115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Chaney, W.E.; Naqvi, S.A.; Gutierrez, M.; Gernat, A.; Johnson, T.J.; Petry, D. Dietary Inclusion of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae-
Derived Postbiotic Is Associated with Lower Salmonella enterica Burden in Broiler Chickens on a Commercial Farm in Honduras.
Microorganisms 2022 ,10, 544. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
159. Chaney, W.E.; McBride, H.; Girgis, G. Effect of a Saccharomyces cerevisiae Postbiotic Feed Additive on Salmonella Enteritidis
Colonization of Cecal and Ovarian Tissues in Directly Challenged and Horizontally Exposed Layer Pullets. Animals 2023 ,13,
1186. [CrossRef]
160. Yang, C.; Chowdhury, M.K.; Hou, Y.; Gong, J. Phytogenic compounds as alternatives to in-feed antibiotics: Potentials and
challenges in application. Pathogens 2015 ,4, 137–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Arain, M.A.; Nabi, F.; Shah, Q.A.; Alagawany, M.; Fazlani, S.A.; Khalid, M.; Soomro, F.; Khand, F.M.; Farag, M.R. The role of
early feeding in improving performance and health of poultry: Herbs and their derivatives. Worlds Poult. Sci. J. 2022 ,78, 499–513.
[CrossRef]
162. Mohammadi Gheisar, M.; Kim, I.H. Phytobiotics in poultry and swine nutrition—A review. Ital. J. Anim. Sci. 2018 ,17, 92–99.
[CrossRef]
163. Pourali, M.; Mirghelenj, S.A.; Kermanshahi, H. Effects of garlic powder on productive performance and immune response of
broiler chickens challenged with Newcastle Disease Virus. Glob. Vet. 2010 ,4, 616–621.
164. Chalghoumi, R.; Belgacem, A.; Trabelsi, I.; Bouatour, Y.; Bergaoui, R. Effect of dietary supplementation with probiotic or essential
oils on growth performance of broiler chickens. Int. J. Poult. Sci. 2013 ,12, 538–544. [CrossRef]
165. Asadi, N.; Husseini, S.D.; Tohidian, M.; Abdali, N.; Mimandipoure, A.; Raﬁeian-Kopaei, M.; Bahmani, M. Performance of broilers
supplemented with peppermint ( Mentha piperita L.) powder. J. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2017 ,22, 703–706. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
166. Mohamed, A.B.; Al-Rubaee, M.A.; Jalil, A.G. Effect of Ginger ( Zingiber ofﬁcinale ) on Performance and. Int. J. Poult. Sci. 2012 ,11,
143–146. [CrossRef]
167. Ghosh, T.; Kumar, A.; Sati, A.; Mondal, B.C.; Singh, S.K.; Kumar, R. Effect of dietary supplementation of herbal feed additives
(black cumin, garlic and turmeric) in combination with linseed oil on production performance of white leghorn laying chickens. J.
Entomol. Zool. Stud. 2020 ,8, 478–482.
168. El-Ghany, A. Phytobiotics in poultry industry as growth promoters, antimicrobials and immunomodulators—A review. J. World’s
Poult. Res. 2020 ,10, 571–579. [CrossRef]
169. Laptev, G.Y.; Filippova, V .A.; Kochish, I.I.; Yildirim, E.A.; Ilina, L.A.; Dubrovin, A.V .; Brazhnik, E.A.; Novikova, N.I.; Novikova,
O.B.; Dmitrieva, M.E. Examination of the expression of immunity genes and bacterial proﬁles in the caecum of growing chickens
infected with Salmonella Enteritidis and fed a phytobiotic. Animals 2019 ,9, 615. [CrossRef]
170. Xu, Z.; Wang, C.; Li, C.; Wang, M.; Chen, W.; Zhou, C.; Wei, P . The effect of oregano essential oil on the prevention and treatment
of Salmonella pullorum and Salmonella gallinarum infections in commercial Yellow-chicken breeders. Front. Vet. Sci. 2022 ,9,
1058844. [CrossRef]
171. Salem, W.M.; El-Hamed, D.M.S.; Sayed, W.F.; Elamary, R.B. Alterations in virulence and antibiotic resistant genes of multidrug-
resistant Salmonella serovars isolated from poultry: The bactericidal efﬁcacy of Allium sativum. Microb. Pathog. 2017 ,108, 91–100.
[CrossRef]
172. Kollanoor-Johny, A.; Mattson, T.; Baskaran, S.A.; Amalaradjou, M.A.; Babapoor, S.; March, B.; Valipe, S.; Darre, M.; Hoagland, T.;
Schreiber, D. Reduction of Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis colonization in 20-day-old broiler chickens by the plant-derived
compounds trans-cinnamaldehyde and eugenol. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012 ,78, 2981–2987. [CrossRef]
173. Vicente, J.L.; Lopez, C.; Avila, E.; Morales, E.; Hargis, B.M.; Tellez, G. Effect of dietary natural capsaicin on experimental
Salmonella enteritidis infection and yolk pigmentation in laying hens. Int. J. Poult. Sci. 2007 ,6, 393–396. [CrossRef]
174. Voyles, B.A. The Biology of Viruses ; Mosby-Year Book. Inc.: St. Louis, MO, USA, 1993.
175. Iqbal, A.; Hasni, S.; Sajjad-ur-Rahman; Aslam, R.; Khan, K. Preparation and evaluation of bacteriophage lysate speciﬁc for
Salmonella typhimurium .Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. 2016 ,5, 828–835. [CrossRef]
176. Higgins, J.P .; Higgins, S.E.; Guenther, K.L.; Huff, W.; Donoghue, A.M.; Donoghue, D.J.; Hargis, B.M. Use of a speciﬁc bacteriophage
treatment to reduce Salmonella in poultry products. Poult. Sci. 2005 ,84, 1141–1145. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 26 of 27
177. Henriques, A.; Sereno, R.; Almeida, A. Reducing Salmonella horizontal transmission during egg incubation by phage therapy.
Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 2013 ,10, 718–722. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
178. Bardina, C.; Spricigo, D.A.; Cort és, P .; Llagostera, M. Signiﬁcance of the bacteriophage treatment schedule in reducing Salmonella
colonization of poultry. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012 ,78, 6600–6607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
179. Kimminau, E.A.; Russo, K.N.; Karnezos, T.P .; Oh, H.G.; Lee, J.J.; Tate, C.C.; Baxter, J.A.; Berghaus, R.D.; Hofacre, C.L. Bacteriophage
in-feed application: A novel approach to preventing Salmonella Enteritidis colonization in chicks fed experimentally contaminated
feed. J. Appl. Poult. Res. 2020 ,29, 930–936. [CrossRef]
180. Li, M.; Lin, H.; Jing, Y.; Wang, J. Broad-host-range Salmonella bacteriophage STP4-a and its potential application evaluation in
poultry industry. Poult. Sci. 2020 ,99, 3643–3654. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
181. Nabil, N.M.; Tawakol, M.M.; Hassan, H.M. Assessing the impact of bacteriophages in the treatment of Salmonella in broiler
chickens. Infect. Ecol. Epidemiol. 2018 ,8, 1539056. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
182. Hao, G.; Li, P .; Huang, J.; Cui, K.; Liang, L.; Lin, F.; Lu, Z.; Sun, S. Research Note: Therapeutic effect of a Salmonella phage
combination on chicks infected with Salmonella Typhimurium. Poult. Sci. 2023 ,102, 102715. [CrossRef]
183. Malik, D.J. Bacteriophage encapsulation using spray drying for phage therapy. Curr. Issues Mol. Biol. 2021 ,40, 303–316. [CrossRef]
184. Luong, T.; Salabarria, A.; Roach, D.R. Phage therapy in the resistance era: Where do we stand and where are we going? Clin. Ther.
2020 ,42, 1659–1680. [CrossRef]
185. Jia, S.; McWhorter, A.R.; Andrews, D.M.; Underwood, G.J.; Chousalkar, K.K. Challenges in vaccinating layer hens against
Salmonella typhimurium. Vaccines 2020 ,8, 696. [CrossRef]
186. Tennant, S.M.; Levine, M.M. Live attenuated vaccines for invasive Salmonella infections. Vaccine 2015 ,33, C36–C41. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
187. Van Immerseel, F.; Methner, U.; Rychlik, I.; Nagy, B.; Velge, P .; Martin, G.; Foster, N.; Ducatelle, R.; Barrow, P .A. Vaccination and
early protection against non-host-speciﬁc Salmonella serotypes in poultry: Exploitation of innate immunity and microbial activity.
Epidemiol. Infect. 2005 ,133, 959–978. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Lin, C.; Lu, T.; Chen, Y.; Yu, H.; Wu, C.; Yang, W. Safety of bivalent live attenuated Salmonella vaccine and its protection against
bacterial shedding and tissue invasion in layers challenged with Salmonella. Poult. Sci. 2022 ,101, 101943. [CrossRef]
189. Groves, P .J.; Sharpe, S.M.; Muir, W.I.; Pavic, A.; Cox, J.M. Live and inactivated vaccine regimens against caecal Salmonella
Typhimurium colonisation in laying hens. Aust. Vet. J. 2016 ,94, 387–393. [CrossRef]
190. Tan, S.; Gyles, C.L.; Wilkie, B.N. Evaluation of an aroA mutant Salmonella typhimurium vaccine in chickens using modiﬁed
semisolid Rappaport Vassiliadis medium to monitor faecal shedding. Vet. Microbiol. 1997 ,54, 247–254. [CrossRef]
191. Senevirathne, A.; Hewawaduge, C.; Park, S.; Park, J.; Kirthika, P .; Lee, J.H. O-antigen-deﬁcient, live, attenuated Salmonella
typhimurium confers efﬁcient uptake, reduced cytotoxicity, and rapid clearance in chicken macrophages and lymphoid organs
and induces signiﬁcantly high protective immune responses that protect chickens against Salmonella infection. Dev. Comp.
Immunol. 2020 ,111, 103745. [PubMed]
192. Eeckhaut, V .; Haesebrouck, F.; Ducatelle, R.; Van Immerseel, F. Oral vaccination with a live Salmonella Enteritidis/Typhimurium
bivalent vaccine in layers induces cross-protection against caecal and internal organ colonization by a Salmonella Infantis strain.
Vet. Microbiol. 2018 ,218, 7–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
193. Kang, X.; Huang, T.; Shen, H.; Meng, C.; Jiao, X.; Pan, Z. Salmonella Enteritidis Subunit Vaccine Candidate Based on SseB Protein
Co-Delivered with Simvastatin as Adjuvant. Pathogens 2022 ,11, 443. [CrossRef]
194. Crouch, C.F.; Nell, T.; Reijnders, M.; Donkers, T.; Pugh, C.; Patel, A.; Davis, P .; van Hulten, M.C.; de Vries, S.P . Safety and efﬁcacy
of a novel inactivated trivalent Salmonella enterica vaccine in chickens. Vaccine 2020 ,38, 6741–6750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
195. Rabie, N.S.; Amin Girh, Z. Bacterial vaccines in poultry. Bull. Natl. Res. Cent. 2020 ,44, 15. [CrossRef]
196. Singh, B.R. Salmonella vaccines for animals and birds and their future perspective. Open Vaccine J. 2009 ,2, 100–112. [CrossRef]
197. Deguchi, K.; Yokoyama, E.; Honda, T.; Mizuno, K. Efﬁcacy of a novel trivalent inactivated vaccine against the shedding of
Salmonella in a chicken challenge model. Avian Dis. 2009 ,53, 281–286. [CrossRef]
198. Acevedo-Villanueva, K.Y.; Akerele, G.O.; Al Hakeem, W.G.; Renu, S.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Selvaraj, R.K. A Novel approach
against Salmonella: A review of polymeric nanoparticle vaccines for broilers and layers. Vaccines 2021 ,9, 1041. [CrossRef]
199. Huberman, Y.D.; Caballero-Garc ía, M.; Rojas, R.; Ascanio, S.; Olmos, L.H.; Malena, R.; Lom ónaco, J.; Nievas, P .; Chero, P .;
Lévano-Grac ía, J. The efﬁcacy of a trivalent inactivated salmonella vaccine combined with the live s. gallinarum 9R vaccine in
young layers after experimental infections with s. enteritidis, s. typhimurium, and s. infantis. Vaccines 2022 ,10, 1113. [CrossRef]
200. Marouf, S.; Ibrahim, H.M.; El-Naggar, M.S.; Swelum, A.A.; Alqhtani, A.H.; El-Saadony, M.T.; El-Tarabily, K.A.; Salem, H.M.
Inactivated pentavalent vaccine against mycoplasmosis and salmonellosis for chickens. Poult. Sci. 2022 ,101, 102139. [CrossRef]
201. Acevedo-Villanueva, K.Y.; Renu, S.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Akerele, G.O.; Gourapura, R.J.; Selvaraj, R.K. Salmonella chitosan
nanoparticle vaccine administration is protective against Salmonella Enteritidis in broiler birds. PLoS ONE 2021 ,16, e0259334.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
202. Acevedo-Villanueva, K.; Akerele, G.; Al-Hakeem, W.; Adams, D.; Gourapura, R.; Selvaraj, R. Immunization of broiler chickens
with a killed chitosan nanoparticle Salmonella vaccine decreases Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis load. Front. Physiol. 2022 ,
13, 920777. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023 ,11, 2814 27 of 27
203. Desin, T.S.; Wisner, A.L.S.; Lam, P .S.; Berberov, E.; Mickael, C.S.; Potter, A.A.; Köster, W. Evaluation of Salmonella enterica serovar
Enteritidis pathogenicity island-1 proteins as vaccine candidates against S. Enteritidis challenge in chickens. Vet. Microbiol. 2011 ,
148, 298–307. [CrossRef]
204. Renu, S.; Markazi, A.D.; Dhakal, S.; Lakshmanappa, Y.S.; Shanmugasundaram, R.; Selvaraj, R.K.; Renukaradhya, G.J. Oral
Deliverable Mucoadhesive Chitosan-Salmonella Subunit Nanovaccine for Layer Chickens. Int. J. Nanomed. 2020 ,15, 761–777.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
205. Vinod, N.; Oh, S.; Kim, S.; Choi, C.W.; Kim, S.C.; Jung, C. Chemically induced Salmonella enteritidis ghosts as a novel vaccine
candidate against virulent challenge in a rat model. Vaccine 2014 ,32, 3249–3255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
206. Jalava, K.; Hensel, A.; Szostak, M.; Resch, S.; Lubitz, W. Bacterial ghosts as vaccine candidates for veterinary applications. J.
Control. Release 2002 ,85, 17–25. [CrossRef]
207. Haidinger, W.; Szostak, M.P .; Jechlinger, W.; Lubitz, W. Online monitoring of Escherichia coli ghost production. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2003 ,69, 468–474. [CrossRef]
208. Jawale, C.V .; Lee, J.H. Comparative evaluation of Salmonella Enteritidis ghost vaccines with a commercial vaccine for protection
against internal egg contamination with Salmonella. Vaccine 2014 ,32, 5925–5930. [CrossRef]
209. Senevirathne, A.; Hewawaduge, C.; Lee, J.H. Immunization of chicken with ﬂagellin adjuvanted Salmonella enteritidis bacterial
ghosts confers complete protection against chicken salmonellosis. Poult. Sci. 2021 ,100, 101205. [CrossRef]
210. Jazayeri, S.D.; Poh, C.L. Recent advances in delivery of veterinary DNA vaccines against avian pathogens. Vet. Res. 2019 ,50, 78.
[CrossRef]
211. Gao, X.; Xu, K.; Yang, G.; Shi, C.; Huang, H.; Wang, J.; Yang, W.; Liu, J.; Liu, Q.; Kang, Y. Construction of a novel DNA vaccine
candidate targeting F gene of genotype VII Newcastle disease virus and chicken IL-18 delivered by Salmonella. J. Appl. Microbiol.
2019 ,126, 1362–1372. [CrossRef]
212. Yu, X.; Jia, R.; Huang, J.; Shu, B.; Zhu, D.; Liu, Q.; Gao, X.; Lin, M.; Yin, Z.; Wang, M. Attenuated Salmonella typhimurium
delivering DNA vaccine encoding duck enteritis virus UL24 induced systemic and mucosal immune responses and conferred
good protection against challenge. Vet. Res. 2012 ,43, 56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
213. Oshop, G.L.; Elankumaran, S.; Heckert, R.A. DNA vaccination in the avian. Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 2002 ,89, 1–12. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
214. Li, J.; Jiang, Y.; Zhao, S.; Chang, X.; Liu, J.; Zeng, X.; Li, Y.; Chen, H. Protective efﬁcacy of an H5N1 DNA vaccine against challenge
with a lethal H5N1 virus in quail. Avian Dis. 2012 ,56, 937–939. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
